From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:08 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yh-000OVwC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:07 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05143
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:44 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 8DB8E7A16A
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:15 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 89F777A109
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:12 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28107 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:37 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:37 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032537.28106.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 01-FAQ-intro
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 70319
Lines: 1446

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Introduction to the FAQ and s.c.j Newsgroups (1/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.1>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/01-FAQ-intro
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Provides information about the FAQ set and about s.c.j in general
Message-ID: <faq.1_970078021@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/01-FAQ-intro
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.01-FAQ-intro
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
      Part 1: Introduction to the FAQ and Soc.Culture.Jewish Newsgroups
                    [Last Post: Wed Sep 27 11:07:07 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: High Level Index

   The following is an index to all the sections of the SCJ FAQ. It is
   grouped by the files available through the SCJ FAQ Autoretriever.
   
   Introduction
   
   01-FAQ-intro
   [1] Network and Newsgroup Introduction
   
   02-Who-We-Are
   [2] Who We Are 
   
   03-Torah-Halacha
   [3] Torah
   [4] Halachic Authority
   
   04-Observance
   [5] Jewish Holidays
   [6] Jewish Dietary Law and Kashrut
   [7] Sabbath and Holiday Observance
   [8] Woman and Marriage
   
   05-Worship
   [9] Jewish Worship
   [10] Conversion, Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"
   [11] Miscellaneous Practice Questions 
   
   06-Jewish-Thought
   [12] Jewish Thought
   
   07-Jews-As-Nation
   [13] Jews as a Nation
   
   08-Israel
   [14] Jews and Israel
   
   09-Antisemitism
   [15] Churban Europa (The Holocaust)
   [16] Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews
   [17] Countering Missionaries
   
   10-Reform
   [18] Reform/Progressive Judaism
   
   11-Miscellaneous
   [19] Miscellaneous
   [20] References and Getting Connected
   
   12-Kids
   [21] Children and Judaism 
   
   Archival Information 
   
   Credits and Acknowledgements
   
   Copyright Information
   
   The following separate FAQ related to Judaism is also published as
   part of the S.C.J. FAQ:
   
   Jewish Resources by Mail Order and Computer
   Steve Seidman <srs3@crux3.cit.cornell.edu>
   
------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                 Section 1:
                     Network and Newsgroup Introduction
                                      
    1. What is USENET? How is it different than "the Web"?
    2. What are the major Jewish newsgroups on USENET?
    3. Why soc.culture.jewish? Wouldn't soc.religion.jewish be more
       appropriate?
    4. What are the charters of the various Jewish newsgroups?
    5. Are there other newsgroups about which Jews should be aware?
    6. I notice that some of these newsgroups are moderated. Isn't
       moderation censorship? 
    7. How do I submit postings to a newsgroup?
    8. Some of these newsgroups have quite a bit of traffic? How do you
       cope with it?
    9. What topics are appropriate for S.C.J?
   10. What topics are not appropriate for S.C.J? 
   11. When should I post to talk.politics.mideast? 
   12. Is it appropriate to discuss Israel in soc.culture.jewish? 
   13. How should I respond to inappropriate articles? Somebody posted an
       inappropriate article to S.C.J or T.P.M. 
   14. But I don't get T.P.M? Now what? 
   15. A. Random Jew posted X to a.b.c; I disagree. What should I do? 
   16. Can non-Jews post to S.C.J?
   17. May I post this great Jewish essay I just read? 
   18. I have a question nogaiah hilchos maaser kesafim b'zman hazeh...
       Eem yeish lee meah or fewer shekalim and some are hefker ... 
   19. I've just found Jesus/ LaRouche/ Muhammad/ Marx/ Moon/
       L.RonHubbard/ Cthulhu and I'd like you to find him, too. Here's an
       essay written by someone raised in a Jewish home who converted to
       my faith... 
   20. I've just gotten this antisemitic email. What should I do?
   21. What are the Do's and Don'ts?


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.1: What is USENET? How is it different than "the Web"?

Answer:
   
   USENET refers to a network of systems that exchange "news" via a
   protocol called the Network News Transfer Protocol (NNTP). This
   protocol, and its predecessors, predate what is commonly called "the
   web", but are now incorporated into it as one of the supported
   protocols in Universal Resource Locators (URLs).
   
   News is a form of broadcast protocol. Articles are posted, and are
   exchanged on stored on newsservers throughout the network. Your ISP
   quite likely has a newserver; for example, if your ISP is "isp.net",
   look for a machine named "news.isp.net" or "nntp.isp.net". Uses use
   news reading agents to connect to the newsservers; these agents read
   and display news. In the Unix world, common agents are programs such
   as rn, trn, vn, and various newsreaders with Emacs, such as gnus. In
   the PC world, there are programs such as Agent. Most browsers also
   provide support for news. Configure your browser to connect to a
   newsreader (look at the configuration options), and then try using the
   URL <news:soc.culture.jewish>. If you need a newsreader, a good source
   to try is The Ultimate Collection of Winsock Software, TUCOWS, located
   at www.tucows.com.
   
   If you do not have the ability or desire to add software, or you do
   not have access to a newsserver, you can visit www.deja.com or
   http://mailandnews.com/to access a web-based newsreader.
   
   So, how is news different than the web. In news, one typically
   subscribes to newsgroups, and then reads the articles in that group,
   in a manner similar to a bulletin board. In some ways, this is more
   active (you still need to retrieve the article, but finding the
   articles of interest is easier). It also supports more discussion, and
   threading of discussion. The web (and by this we mean normal HTML
   pages) is more interactive: one must hunt down the pages one wants.
   One can implement bulletin boards and forums via web pages in a manner
   similar to news; however, such pages do not use the news protocols and
   cannot be accessed by newsreaders.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.2: What are the major Jewish newsgroups on USENET?

Answer:
   
   The following are the main "positive" Jewish newsgroups. "Positive"
   refers to the fact that the newsgroups tends to take a positive
   attitude towards Jews/Judaism; the goal of the group is not to make
   fun of Judaism, to have non-Jewish discussions, or to be anti-Jewish.
   This list also does not include regional newsgroups.

     * Unmoderated Newsgroups. These newsgroups provide no outside
       control over content; posting appropriate content is left to the
       discretion of the article author. Alas, this results in a high
       level of noise in such groups; however, some individuals find the
       noise an acceptable price to pay to avoid the oversight of a
       moderator.

          + soc.culture.jewish. The granddaddy of all the Jewish
            newsgroups. This group is pretty freewheeling, and is
            moderated only by user self-control, usually guided by this
            FAQ. Any sort of Jewish topic is discussed here.

          + alt.humor.jewish. The unmoderated Jewish humor group. Expect
            anything in this group, including Jewish jokes of
            questionable taste. There are a number of more questionable
            subgroups under alt.humor.jewish.

          + alt.music.jewish. This unmoderated group focuses on the
            discussion of Jewish music and Jewish musicians.

          + alt.personals.jewish. This unmoderated group is a forum for
            Jews looking for Jews, inorder to form relationships of
            various sorts.

     * Moderated Newsgroups. In a moderated newsgroup, all submissions
       are sent to a moderator or moderation team, who must review the
       submission according to some standards to determine if it is
       appropriate for the group. Only if it is appropriate is it posted
       to the newsgroup.

          + soc.culture.jewish.moderated. This newsgroup is for
            discussions of anything Jewish, but with the gentle hand of a
            moderator to filter out the noise and personal attacks.

          + soc.culture.jewish.holocaust. This newsgroup is specifically
            for discussion of issues related to the "shoah" or
            "holocaust"; i.e., the massacre of Jews that occurred during
            World War II.

          + soc.culture.jewish.parenting. This newsgroup, an offshoot of
            both misc.kids and soc.culture.jewish, provides a moderated
            forum for the discussion of Jewish parenting issues.

          + rec.food.cuisine.jewish. This newsgroup is for the discussion
            of Jewish and Jewish-style cooking and related issues.

          + rec.humor.jewish. Got a good Jewish joke? Then this is the
            place for you.

          + soc.geneology.jewish. This newsgroup is for individuals
            researching their family trees.

          + alt.religion.judaism.orthodox. This newsgroup (a rare
            moderated newsgroup in the alt hierarchy) is for discussion
            of things Orthodox. It is a good source of traditional Torah
            commentaries.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.3: Why soc.culture.jewish? Wouldn't soc.religion.jewish
         be more appropriate?

Answer:
   
   The name "soc.culture.jewish" (S.C.J) is a net.historical relic. In
   the early years of Usenet, there was only one Jewish newsgroups, and
   it was named net.religion.jewish. In the late 1980s, the Usenet
   namespace was reworked in what was called the "Great Renaming". This
   renaming took the flat namespace of net.* groups, and created the new
   top-level groups: comp, rec, soc, talk, sci, misc, and news. At this
   time, there was a common belief that renaming net.religion.jewish to
   talk.religion.jewish would be detrimental to the group's success, for
   it was believed that talk. groups would have lower propagation and be
   less likely to be carried by administrators. So the net's collective
   "yidisher kop" [or "yidisher kop"] did an end run around this, and
   proposed that the group be moved into the soc.culture.* hierarchy. And
   here we are.
   
   At time has passed, a number of split-offs from soc.culture.jewish
   have been created. Some of these have been created in the
   soc.culture.jewish hierarchy, for various reasons (e.g.,
   s.c.j.parenting, s.c.j.holocaust, s.c.j.moderated). Others have been
   created in other hierarchies, with a clear identification of their
   Jewish nature (rec.food.cuisine.jewish, rec.humor.jewish,
   soc.geneology.jewish). Other newsgroups have been created in the
   free-for-all "alt" hierarchy, with almost any name.
   
   So, while Jews have argued forever about whether Judaism is more of a
   "culture" or a "religion" or a something else, the choice of name for
   this newsgroup is not proof of anything. So if you start arguing "but
   this group is soc.culture.jewish, so...," please, as a well known
   character in a 1970's US television comedy series says: "just stifle."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.4: What are the charters of the various Jewish
         newsgroups?

Answer:
   
   A charter of a newsgroup bounds the content of the newsgroup. The
   following are the charters of the main Jewish newsgroups. Note that
   the charter descriptions listed here are abridged (condensed);
   usually, a pointer is given to the source of the full charter.

     * Unmoderated Newsgroups:

          + soc.culture.jewish. S.C.J does not have a formal charter; it
            predates the time when charters were required as part of
            group creation. This FAQ serves as the primary guideline
            regarding acceptable content for the group.

          + alt.humor.jewish. This group appears to have no regularly
            posted charter.

          + alt.music.jewish. This group appears to have no regularly
            posted charter.

          + alt.personals.jewish. This group appears to have no regularly
            posted charter.

     * Moderated Newsgroups:

          + soc.culture.jewish.moderated. This is a moderated newsgroup
            for the discussion of all aspects of Judaism, including its
            history, philosophy, culture, practice, and law. In general,
            any post which contains substantive Jewish content is
            appropriate. The following posts are unacceptable in SCJM,
            unless they have substantive Jewish content: (1)
            inappropriately crossposted discussion (more than 3 groups,
            or to any group on a list of banned groups, with some
            exceptions, such as the FAQ); (2) posts whose connection to
            Judaism consists solely of the Jewish identity of one of its
            participants or subjects (personal announcements are an
            exception); (3) political discussion, including Israeli,
            Middle Eastern, and Arab politics; (4) posts whose connection
            to Judaism consists solely of a relationship to Israel; (5)
            offensive or derogatory statements aimed at any individual or
            group (criticism of ideas or actions, however, is acceptable,
            provided they meet the other requirements); (6) posts that
            deny or question the existence or extent of the Holocaust
            (responses are similarly off-topic, but discussion of how
            Jews can/ought to respond to such ideas is OK); (7)
            proselytizing or witnessing for any non-Jewish religion
            (discussion of how Jews can/ought to respond to such attempts
            is OK); (8) discussion of the beliefs or doctrines of Jews
            for Jesus, Hebrew Christianity, Messianic Judaism, or other
            similar groups (again, discussion of how Jews should respond
            to such groups is OK); (9) binary posts, with some small
            exceptions; (10) commercial posts for non-Jewish items.
            Additionally, discussion of the moderation policy of the
            newsgroup and the moderators' decisions are also unacceptable
            in SCJM; such discussion belongs on a side mailing list,
            scjm-policy@lists.nj.org. Specifically, this list is for
            discussion of potential changes to the charter or moderation
            policy, changes to the composition of the moderation panel,
            changes in the way the moderation guidelines, or any other
            subjects regarding the way in which the group is moderated.
            [The restriction about Meta-discussion to the scjm-policy
            list was not part of the original charter; it is a moderation
            policy change announced on 25 July 2000 by Russell Steinthal
            that was made in accordance with the charter. To subscribe to
            the scjm-policy list, send a message to
            scjm-policy-request@lists.nj.org with the body text
            "subscribe".]
            For more information: The charter and moderation policy is
            regularly posted in the newsgroup.

          + soc.culture.jewish.holocaust. This newsgroup focuses upon the
            events leading up to the Holocaust, the events of the
            Holocaust itself (such as Kristallnacht and the concentration
            and death camps), and closely-related events and consequences
            following the Holocaust (such as the search for and
            imprisonment/execution of Nazi criminals who fled).
            Discussion about the historical and social contexts of these
            events, such as antisemitism within and without Nazi Germany
            and the response of the outside world is also welcome. Other
            topics that are encouraged include religious and
            philosophical reactions and responses to the Holocaust (i.e.
            how was faith strengthened or weakened by the Shoah),
            discussions by Holocaust concentration camp liberators, and
            book reviews of texts that focus on the Holocaust. The
            following posts are unacceptable in SCJH: (1) discussion of
            Holocaust denial (euphemistically "revisionism"), or ways to
            counteract such denial [Such discussion belongs in
            alt.revisionism]; (2) ad hominem attacks, flames, or foul
            language; (3) commercial messages unless they are of high
            informational value to the SCJH community; (4) copyrighted
            material without permission of the copyright holder.
            Cross-posted messages will be considered, but not
            cross-posted.
            For more information: www.holocausthistory.org. The charter
            is regularly posted in the newsgroup.

          + soc.culture.jewish.parenting. This group provides a forum for
            discussing issues specific to rearing children within a
            Jewish context. Topics for discussion range from very
            specific requests for advice and information to broader
            questions about Jewish education and practice. In the context
            of soc.culture.jewish.parenting, the phrase "within a Jewish
            context" is intended to indicate either an environment in
            which the child's primary belief system is Judaism (without
            regard to the belief systems of the child's caretakers), or
            the Jewish aspects of a multifaith child's environment. The
            group also uses a broad definition of Judaism is used,
            ranging from Humanistic Judaism to more traditional forms,
            but excluding combined faith systems such as "Messianic
            Judaism" (sic). Unacceptable posts include (1) questions or
            statements attacking, showing a lack of respect for, or
            questioning the fundamental Jewish validity of an
            individual's outlook, affiliation, or practices; (2) posts
            that criticize a parent for any circumcision decision made
            for their son; (3) medical arguments for or against
            circumcision; (4) questions unrelated to Jewish traditions
            and practices in the context of raising a child (with one
            exception: introductions of participants); (5) submissions
            that attack an individual as opposed to an individual's
            position; (6) commercial announcements (regional
            announcements and commercial product reviews are permitted on
            a limited basis); (7) questions regarding general practices
            of Judaism not pertaining to raising children (redirected to
            soc.culture.jewish or other appropriate groups); (8) extended
            discussions about halacha (religious law) when they no longer
            deal with parenting-related issues; (9) questions pertaining
            to general parenting practices (redirected to misc.kids or
            other appropriate groups); (10) questions and discussions
            regarding how to raise children in an intercultural
            environment that do not focus on Jewish aspects of the
            child's upbringing; and (11) questions about non-Jewish
            religious traditions.
            Other notes: This group is mirrored with the SCJ-PARENTING
            mailing list, managed through the listproc as shamash.org. To
            subscribe, send a message of the form "subscribe
            scj-parenting yourfirstname yourlastname" to
            listproc@shamash.org.
            For more information: The FAQ for SCJP is regularly posted;
            it is also available through the SCJFAQ autoretriever. Send
            the command "send scjp-faq" to archives@scjfaq.org.

          + rec.food.cuisine.jewish. Rec.food.cuisine.jewish is for the
            discussion of various aspects of Jewish food. These include:
            sharing of recipes from Jewish ethnic streams (Sephardic,
            Ashkenazic, Yemenite, etc.) and communities around the world;
            adaptation of classic Jewish recipes to current lifestyle
            demands, such as the problems often faced by vegans and
            vegetarians during Passover; adaptation of new recipes to the
            requirements of keeping a kosher kitchen; Sabbath, holiday
            and holy day cooking and cuisine; recipes and menus for
            life-cycle celebrations (births, Bar/Bat Mitzva, weddings);
            sourcing suppliers, delicatessens and restaurants (locations,
            specialties, reviews and recipes); Jewish cooking history,
            traditions, cookbooks and related reference materials.
            Discussions may also include tips on setting up a kosher
            kitchen, kosher-food preparation, recipes, ingredient
            substitutions in non-kosher recipes, techniques, existence of
            rabbinic approval or labeling of specific food products,
            keeping kosher when traveling, kosher restaurants, caterers
            and hotels. Interpretation of the religious laws is beyond
            the scope of RFCJ. Recipes posted to the newsgroup are
            expected to respect the basic framework of the Jewish dietary
            laws: no recipes calling for pork or pork products,
            shellfish, catfish or crustaceans, and no recipes mixing meat
            or poultry with dairy products. The group expects that
            sensitivity will be exhibited both by those who observe the
            Jewish dietary laws and those who do not; inflammatory
            postings about one's degree of observance or the
            philosophical merits of "kashruth" are strictly outside this
            group's framework. The group is a lightly moderated group;
            unacceptable postings include antisemitic posts; other
            inflammatory diatribes; vulgarity; commercial advertisements
            that do not relate to Jewish food in any way; posts that
            attempt to coerce anyone to alter their spiritual practices;
            get-rich-quick schemes and similar spam; messages that have
            been known to perpetuate such urban myths as the
            Neiman-Marcus chocolate chip cookie recipe; cross-posts to
            other groups; and posts from anonymous addresses.
            For more information: RFCJ Archives at
            http://www.cyber-kitchen.com/rfcj/ and regular moderation
            guideline posts to the newsgroup.

          + rec.humor.jewish. RHJ is for anyone who wants to share and
            discuss humor, primarily humor as it pertains to Jews, their
            culture, Israel, and the Jewish religion. Non-Jewish humor
            will also be accepted. The whole idea is to make people
            laugh! Unacceptable postings are in the following areas: (1)
            antisemitic posts; (2) revisionist posts (holocaust deniers);
            (3) posts from individuals/groups that have openly advocated
            harm against the Jewish people; (4) website announcements
            unrelated to Judaism, with some exceptions; (5) excessively
            crossposted articles; (6) trolls, spam, off-topic or
            offensive posts; (7) personal messages; (8) off-topic
            threads; (9) posts that offer or promote conversion to
            another religion; (10) large binaries and formats
            incompatible with the moderation software; (11) posts with
            explicit sexual content; (12) exact duplicates of posts
            recently submitted; (13) posts not in English; (14)
            advertisements and/or announcements and/or endorsements for
            profit or non-profit endeavours; (15) copyrighted works.
            Posters are expected to maintain a basic tone of civility,
            not make derogatory remarks about religious practices or the
            lack of them, and refrain from making derogatory comments
            about other religious, racial, or ethnic groups.
            For more information:
            http://members.tripod.com/~rechumorjewish. The charter and an
            RHJ FAQ are regularly posted in that newsgroup.

          + soc.geneology.jewish. The JewishGen(r) Discussion Group is a
            computer-based forum devoted to Jewish genealogy. Users can
            request help with genealogical problems, post information
            about new sources for research, and network with other Jewish
            genealogists globally. The only acceptable content are
            messages that are related to research in Jewish genealogy
            such as: offering or requesting information on resources;
            inquiries about geographical locations or families;
            information on research techniques; brief reports about
            research trips; and concise summaries of meetings and
            seminars.
            Additional notes: This newsgroup is a mirror of the JewishGen
            mailing list. To subscribe to the JewishGen mailing list on
            Internet, you can use the web subscription form at
            http://www.jewishgen.org/listserv/jg.htm or by sending an
            e-mail message to listserv@lyris.jewishgen.org containing the
            message body (NOT the subject field): "SUBSCRIBE JewishGen
            FirstName LastName".
            For more information: See
            http://www.jewishgen.org/infofiles/faq.html and
            http://www.jewishgen.org/infofiles/rules.htm.

          + alt.religion.judaism.orthodox. This newsgroup is for
            discussions concerning Orthodox Judaism and the surrounding
            education (Halakha, Talmut Torah etc.), including discussions
            regarding the various Orthodox recognised movements within
            Judaism and educational discussion. Educational discussion
            includes discussion of the Parashat Hashavua; Weekly Haftora
            discussions; Tehillim examination; Different topics in
            Halakha; Holidays. Unacceptable topices include: (1) Middle
            East politics, especially international issues concerning
            Israel; (2) Material that is available from a listserv; (3)
            "witnessing" or preaching; (4) discussions of so-called
            "Messianic Judaism[sic]," and the Christian missionary
            organization calling itself "Jews for Jesus,"; (5)
            revisionist teachings (i.e., those teachings that attempt to
            deny that the holocaust ever happened); (6) personal attacks,
            Lashon Hara, and Motzei Shem Ra.
            For more information: http://stump.algebra.com/~arjo.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.5: Are there other newsgroups about which Jews should be
         aware?

Answer:
   
   The following newsgroups are not considered "Jewish" newsgroups.
   However, they are more appropriate forums or venues for discussions
   that often take place on SCJ and its family of newsgroups.

     * Unmoderated Newsgroups.

          + alt.revisionism. This unmoderated newsgroup is for
            discussions related to holocaust deniers and their theories.
            If you want to claim it never happened, do it in
            alt.revisionism. If you want to battle those who claim it
            never happened, do it in alt.revisionism.

          + alt.messianic. This unmoderated newsgroup is for discussions
            related to what is called "Messianic Judaism", or similar
            groups such as Jews for Jesus.

          + misc.kids and its family of newsgroups. These are the
            appropriate places for parenting discussions unrelated to
            Judaism.
            soc.culture.israel. This unmoderated newsgroup is for
            discussions related to the culture of the state of Israel.

          + soc.history. This unmoderated newsgroup also has a fair bit
            of revisionist discussions.

          + talk.politics.mideast. This unmoderated newsgroup is for the
            discussion of Israeli politics, and the politics of other
            countries in the Middle East.

     * Moderated Newsgroups.

          + misc.kids.moderated. This moderated newsgroup is a
            low-traffic parallel to misc.kids, and is also for parenting
            discussions unrelated to Judaism.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.6: I notice that some of these newsgroups are moderated.
         Isn't moderation censorship?

Answer:
   
   It depends on your definition of censorship. The Merriam-Webster
   dictionary (at www.m-w.com) defines censorship as follows:
   
     Main Entry: cen.sor.ship
     Pronunciation: 'sen(t)-s&r-"ship
     Function: noun
     Date: circa 1591
     1 a : the institution, system, or practice of censoring b : the
     actions or practices of censors; especially : censorial control
     exercised repressively
     2 : the office, power, or term of a Roman censor
     3 : exclusion from consciousness by the psychic censor
     
   "Censor" is defined as:
   
     Main Entry: 2censor
     Function: transitive verb
     Inflected Form(s): cen.sored; cen.sor.ing /'sen(t)-s&-ri[ng],
     'sen(t)s-ri[ng]/
     Date: 1882
     : to examine in order to suppress or delete anything considered
     objectionable
     
   Hence, under this broad definition, moderation can be viewed as a form
   of censorship: objectionable material is not permitted in the
   particular venue. However, there are some arguments against calling
   moderation censorship:

     * Censorship usually implies removable of objectionable material by
       the government. When done by a private enterprise, such as the
       editor of a magizine, it is viewed more as editorial control.

     * Although the particular moderated group may be "censored", USENET
       as a whole is not censored, as for each moderated group there is a
       suitable unmoderated forum to which the material can be posted.
       These are listed below:

          + mod: soc.culture.jewish.moderated
            unmod: soc.culture.jewish

          + mod: soc.culture.jewish.parenting
            unmod: soc.culture.jewish or misc.kids

          + mod: soc.culture.jewish.holocaust
            unmod: soc.culture.jewish, alt.revisionism, soc.history

          + mod: rec.food.cuisine.jewish
            unmod: other rec.food newsgroups, soc.culture.jewish

          + mod: rec.humor.jewish
            unmod: alt.humor.jewish

          + mod: soc.geneology.jewish
            unmod: soc.roots, soc.culture.jewish

          + mod: alt.religion.judaism.orthodox
            unmod: soc.culture.jewish
       
   Do people prefer a moderated newsgroup? Some do and some don't. It is
   only recently that moderated spinoffs from soc.culture.jewish have
   developed. This is due to the increased traffic on Usenet, and the
   changing nature of the Usenet audience from the early academic focus.
   
   Many on S.C.J feel that part of its appeal and taam
   (flavor/tang/spice) comes from the freewheeling unmoderated approach
   which brings together posters from all parts of the spectrum. However,
   many have tired from the intrusion into the group by others with
   specific agendas to push that are decidedly non- or anti-Jewish.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.7: How do I submit postings to a newsgroup?

Answer:
   
   For all newsgroups, both moderated and unmoderated, your news reader
   software should provide an interface to "post" an article to a group.
   This is the primary way of submitting postings. If the newsgroup is
   unmoderated, the article is submitted immediately; note that it will
   take up to a week to propagate through the network. If the newsgroup
   is moderated, the article will be Emailed to the moderation address on
   record for the group. Once the moderator approves the article (usually
   within 24 hours you will have an answer), the article is injected at
   the moderation site. Again, it can take a week to propagate through
   the entire network.
   
   If you do not have a newsreader, you can visit www.deja.com or
   www.mailandnews.com to access a web-based newsreader.
   
   For moderated groups, there is an additional submittal mechanism:
   mailing the article directly to the moderation submittal address.
   These addresses are as follows:

     * soc.culture.jewish.moderated. Posts can be sent to
       scjm@scjm.nj.org.

     * soc.culture.jewish.holocaust. Posts can be sent to
       shoahmod@verdad.org.

     * soc.culture.jewish.parenting. Posts can be sent to
       scjp@shamash.org.

     * rec.food.cuisine.jewish. Posts can be sent to rfcj@qwikweb.net.

     * rec.humor.jewish. Posts can be sent to RHJ@kamens.brookline.ma.us.

     * soc.geneology.jewish. Posts can be sent to
       jewishgen@lyris.jewishgen.org.

     * alt.religion.judaism.orthodox. Posts can be sent to
       arjo@stump.algebra.com.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.8: Some of these newsgroups have quite a bit of traffic?
         How do you cope with it?

Answer:
   
   There are two ways to cope with it. Some escape to moderated groups,
   and either never or only periodically check in with their unmoderated
   cousins. Others continue to "fight the good fight" in all forums.
   However, the comments below apply to filtering of both moderated and
   unmoderated newsgroups.
   
   The approach to take depends on your particular newsreader and setup
   for news. Some provide kill or filtering mechanisms, and some do not.
   Those that do not (if this information is wrong, please inform the FAQ
   maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org) include Free Agent, the Netscape
   newsreader, and the web-based Deja and MailandNews readers. Most
   Unix-based readers provide filtering mechanisms, as does the Agent
   reader. [Both Agent and Free Agent are available at TUCOWS,
   www.tucows.com]
   
   For most of the Unix readers, you need to use a "kill file." It's an
   algorithm which scans articles and eliminates those meeting criteria
   you specify. If you read news with "rn" or one of its offspring, you
   create a file News/soc/culture/jewish/KILL consisting of lines such
   as:
/talk.politics/h:j      # skip all articles cross-posted to talk.politics.*
/J. Random Luser/h:j    # skip all articles written by J. Random Luser
/egitimate/j            # skip all articles with "egitimate" in Subject

   If you use rn, trn, or any of its varients, you can find a useful
   explanation of how to make a kill file in the Killfile FAQ. This is
   available on rtfm.mit.edu or ftp.uu.net. The URL is:

     * ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet-by-hierarchy/news/answers/killfile-f
       aq
       
   This can be retrieved by sending Email to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
   with the following line in the body of the message:
        send usenet/news.answers/killfile.faq

   Other newsreaders implement this feature differently. For example, the
   "gnus" package from within Gnu Emacs would have a killfile like:
        (gnus-kill "Xref" "talk\\.politics")
        (gnus-kill "Author" "joe_user@site\\.com")
        (gnus-kill "Subject" "\\blegitimate\\b")
        (gnus-expunge "x")

   If you use Gnus, you can find out more information on the killfile
   facility by typing M-x info within gnus.
   
   If you use the newsreader nn, James Kahn wrote that you can just type
   K (that is, a capital K), and nn will then prompt you for various
   things, such as whether to kill by name or by subject, etc.
   
   If you use a different newsreading program, you may be out of luck. In
   that case, your best bet is to ask someone at your local site how to
   create killfiles, or read the manual about your newsreading program.
   You might consider writing a perl script to preprocess your news for
   you.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.9: What topics are appropriate for S.C.J?

Answer:
   
   Now, our discussion turns specifically to appropriate content for the
   unmoderated newsgroup soc.culture.jewish, although these comments in
   general can provide good advice for other Jewish newsgroups.
   
   Soc.culture.jewish is for discussions concerning Judaism and the
   surrounding culture (Yiddishkeit, Hebrew, Jewish motherhood, etc.).
   This includes discussions regarding the various recognized movements
   within Judaism, debates over halacha, Torah interpretations, etc.
   
   "Divrey Torah" - long or short sermons relating to Judaism and Torah,
   are especially welcome.
   
   Survey questions are also appropriate, such as "How does your
   community organize its free loan societies and scholarships for poor
   Jews who want a Jewish education?"
   
   Discussions about aliyah and Zionism are appropriate, but only if they
   remain in a Jewish context. If you want to talk about the more
   political or secular aspects of these subjects, it is more appropriate
   to use soc.culture.israel.
   
   Factual discussions of the holocaust (shoah) are allowed in S.C.J;
   however, those wishing to discuss that issue might want to explore
   instead the newsgroup soc.culture.jewish.holocaust. S.C.J.H is a
   moderated newsgroup that serves as a storagehouse for all kinds of
   information from various sources on the Holocaust in Europe that
   occurred between 1942-1945 (along with the events leading up to it
   that happened in the early 30's). The newsgroup includes Holocaust
   materials from both personal testimonies of survivors and their
   families and "hard" facts from historians and observers. It is
   moderated to prevent any anti-Semitic or race-baiting comments from
   Neo-Nazis or self-proclaimed "academic" Holocaust deniers or
   revisionists, and is not be a forum for discussing whether or not the
   Shoah happened; instead, S.C.J.H is a place for intelligent and
   factual discussion of the Shoah. For those Usenet readers who wish to
   debate the existence of the Holocaust, they are encouraged to read the
   groups alt.revisionists and soc.history.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.10: What topics are not appropriate for S.C.J?

Answer:
   
   Middle East politics, especially international issues concerning
   Israel, belong in talk.politics.mideast (T.P.M), not S.C.J. You
   certainly should not crosspost between S.C.J and T.P.M. Discussions of
   internal Israeli politics belong in soc.culture.israel (S.C.I). Again,
   they should not be crossposted to S.C.J. Pick whichever one is
   appropriate.
   
   Discussions of Israeli Culture are inappropriate for S.C.J; rather,
   they belong in S.C.I. Crossposting between S.C.I and S.C.J is
   appropriate only for articles dealing with Jewish, as opposed to
   secular Israeli, issues. If the group il.talk exists, it is also
   appropriate for discussions of Israeli culture, but note that its
   distribution is limited to Israel and sites receiving the il
   distribution.
   
   Material that is available from a listserv is inappropriate to post to
   S.C.J (that is, the entire newsgroup shouldn't receive the list).
   However, a single weekly message listing the lists available is
   reasonable. One sample from a new list is allowed.
   
   Readers of S.C.J are committed to their religion; it is inappropriate
   to "witness" or preach. Discussions of so-called "Messianic
   Judaism[sic]," and the Christian missionary organization calling
   itself "Jews for Jesus," and similar topics belong in alt.messianic or
   the appropriate talk.religion.* group; don't crosspost them to S.C.J.
   
   Revisionist teachings (i.e., those teachings that attempt to deny that
   the holocaust ever happened) are inappropriate for S.C.J. They belong
   in alt.revisionism. For more information on how to cope with those
   holding revisionist beliefs, the interested reader is referred to
   [Lip93] (Lipstadt, Deborah. Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault
   on Truth and Memory.) in the Antisemitism portion of the reading list.
   
   Lastly, try to avoid personal attacks. Don't write "Lashon Hara",
   derogatory information about people or groups. (If slanderous and
   false, it's called "Motzei Shem Ra") It is also forbidden to embarrass
   others in public. (Rare exceptions exist, so read a book such as R'
   Pliskin's Guard your Tongue for details.)
   
   As Josh Backon reminded us:
   
     The Bible states (Leviticus 19:17): "You shall surely rebuke your
     neighbor and not bear sin because of him". The Talmud comments that
     you may reprove your neighbor as long as you do not insult him but
     if you embarrass him by making him blush or turn pale from shame or
     fury then you have incurred guilt because of him (Sifra, Kedoshim
     4:8; Talmud Arachin 16b). The Talmud (Shevuot 36a) mentions a
     general prohibition against insulting a fellow man. Pirke Avot
     (3:11) states that he who causes embarrassment to a fellow man has
     no share in the world-to-come. The Talmud (Bava Metzia 58b)
     compared the slanderer to a shedder of blood, and the Rambam
     (Hilchot Chovel Umazzik 3:7) characterized all slanderers as wicked
     and stupid. The later scholars instituted disciplinary floggings
     for cases of slander (Choshen Mishpat 420:41).
     
   Eliot Shimoff expressed it this way:
   
     Lots of people read what we post; there are many lurkers who read
     and don't post. Keep them in mind when you write. If you are
     offended by some aspect of the Reform movement, it does little good
     to post a vituperative attack on that G-dless crew of evil people;
     your audience is far more likely to be offended than to either
     learn or think. Similarly, it does little good to write a missive
     pointing out how backward, narrow-minded and medieval those
     Orthodox Jews are; you are offending, but not teaching or
     informing. If your goal is to increase the influence of Reform
     Judaism, discuss its strong points rather than attacking Orthodoxy;
     the greatest enemies of Reform are those who advocate it by
     denigrating (usually inaccurately) Orthodoxy.
     
     Similarly, if your goal is to spread the Orthodox understanding of
     Torah, don't try to do so by attacking non-Orthodox movements;
     instead, try to explain the Orthodox position, and to show its
     strengths.
     
     In addition to the lurkers, there is also the Lurker; we should all
     try to ensure that whatever we write should not only be accurate,
     but should also be kiddush haShem, a sanctification of G-d's name.
     We should always write in a form that will get readers to say, at
     least, "I disagree with this person, but he/she is a fundamentally
     decent human being who is trying, to the best of his/her ability,
     to be a good person (although there are some non-Jewish posters), a
     good Jew."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.11: When should I post to talk.politics.mideast?
         Soc.culture.Arabic?

Answer:
   
   Talk.politics.mideast was created specifically for discussions of the
   politics of the interaction of middle eastern countries. The
   Arab-Israeli conflict, the Turkish-Armenian conflict, and similar
   battles are appropriate topics for the list, at least until separate
   groups are created for those subtopics. A post about the PLO or
   terrorism probably belongs in T.P.M.
   
   Internal Arab politics generally belong on soc.culture.arabic.
   Internal Israeli politics should be discussed in soc.culture.israel.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.12: Is it appropriate to discuss Israel in
         soc.culture.jewish?

Answer:
   
   Only if it is in the context of Jewish religion or Jewish culture.
   General discussions about Israel, and discussions of Israeli politics
   belong in soc.culture.israel. Discussions about the religious basis
   for Zionism and religious legislation in Israel are OK for S.C.J.
   Interaction with other countries is really a matter for
   talk.politics.mideast.
   
   Note that there is a lot of information available about Israel, in
   particular, the subjects of Aliyah and Zionism, from Virtual
   Jerusalem, located at http://www.virtualjerusalem.com/.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.13: How should I respond to inappropriate articles?
         Somebody posted an inappropriate article to S.C.J or T.P.M.

Answer:
   
   Respond once where the person directed followups, or where the article
   was posted. Set the Followup-To: header line to the appropriate group,
   and start your article with a note that you are re-setting followups
   to the appropriate group, and will not continue discussion in the
   inappropriate group.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.14: But I don't get T.P.M? Now what?

Answer:
   
   You don't get T.P.M? First, whomever owns your newsserver has made a
   strategic decision about the costs of getting S.C.J and T.P.M. You
   have no right to overrule that decision. You can discuss it with your
   site management, but please, leave S.C.J out of it. T.P.M was created
   a spinoff from S.C.J, just to get rid of the endless Mideast
   discussions.
   
   However, you can still get to T.P.M if you have access to the web.
   Simply go to one of the websites that provide public news access, such
   as Deja (www.deja.com) or Mailandnews (www.mailandnews.com).
   
   Note that internal Israeli politics, or discussions about the IDF, are
   not considered "Mideast politics".

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.15: A. Random Jew posted X to a.b.c; I disagree. What
         should I do?

Answer:
   
   Although the poster may be Jewish, that is not a valid reason to
   include S.C.J in your list of followup newsgroups. If you are
   disputing what the poster said, it is always best to (after pausing to
   reflect) respond via private Email. If you feel the answer has wide
   public interest, you should followup the response in the groups to
   which the article was originally posted.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.16: Can non-Jews post to S.C.J?

Answer:
   
   All Usenet readers have equal right to post to S.C.J.. However, as
   with all newsgroups, you should note that the collective readership
   has a general consensus on what types of posting are acceptable. In
   the case of S.C.J., this consensus reflects the fact that most of the
   readers are Jewish. Also, don't post general questions which can be
   answered in this FAQ or in a library. If your motivation is simply to
   get an answer to a question, you can send e-mail to a few regular
   posters, or drop a note to questions@scjfaq.org.
   
   If you choose to ask your question of the S.C.J readership, you may be
   placed under suspicion of being a missionary, especially if you
   "innocently" ask something like "Someone please explain to me why Jews
   stubbornly refuse to accept my faith, when it's written right in your
   Bible..."
   
   We've seen it all a thousand times before, and unsolicited
   declarations of belief in <your religion> in S.C.J convey the message
   "<your religion> supports harassing Jews." You're welcome to observe,
   participate, and learn about Judaism. Proselytizing is inappropriate.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.17: May I post this great Jewish essay I just read?

Answer:
   
   Yes, if you obtain permission from the publisher. They are often glad
   to give permission to republish articles occasionally, provided that
   you include subscription information. Point out to them that several
   S.C.J readers have subscribed to journals after seeing articles
   republished electronically. All it usually takes is a phone call or
   letter.
   
   If you only wish to discuss the essayist's ideas, just post a summary
   and a pointer to the article for interested readers.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.18: I have a question nogaiah hilchos maaser kesafim
         b'zman hazeh... Eem yeish lee meah or fewer shekalim and some are
         hefker ...

Answer:
   
   Please! The primary language for Usenet is English. Translate your
   Hebrew and Aramaic when you post in order to maximize the
   understanding of what you write. Include a glossary for the lesser
   known terms. Some common ones are part of this FAQ (see Section 19 in
   Part 11). Words of non-English origin need not be translated if they
   are used widely enough to appear in a standard dictionary such as
   Webster's Ninth New Collegiate (e.g. Talmud; bat mitzvah). You can
   check the dictionary at www.m-w.com
   
   Usenet is a bad place to ask technical questions of Jewish law.
   Instead, ask a qualified rabbi. If you know of none, then post a
   request for rabbinic advice - many have access to electronic mail, and
   many readers can find a rabbi near you. You can also forward your
   question to questions@scjfaq.org, and the FAQ moderator will attempt
   to forward your question to someone who can get you the right answer.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.19: I've just found Jesus/ LaRouche/ Muhammad/ Marx/
         Moon/ L.RonHubbard/ Cthulhu and I'd like you to find him, too.
         Here's an essay written by someone raised in a Jewish home who
         converted to my faith...

Answer:
   
   Proselytizing on S.C.J is highly rude and unwelcome, and will greatly
   diminish the respect S.C.J readers have for you and your group.
   Although we could direct you to some other group in which to post, you
   should be aware that proselytizing over the network is, in general,
   not well accepted. You would just as likely be rebuffed in another
   group as well.
   
   That said, if you want to explore your religion more (and it isn't
   Judaism), there are plenty of groups that are more appropriate. Please
   consult your list of newsgroups.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.20: I've just gotten this antisemitic email. What should
         I do?

Answer:
   
   First, calm down. They win if they get you upset. The first thing to
   do is to write a polite letter to the postmaster of the site that sent
   the email. Emphasis on the word POLITE. It may take investigation to
   determine the real site. Look at the From: line, the Reply-To: line,
   the References: line, the Received: lines, and the Message-Id: lines.
   Often, people like to hide under fake addresses. In your letter,
   explain that you have received unsolicited hate mail from a user at
   their site, and request that the administrator discuss proper use of
   Email with their user. Remember: the user may have left their terminal
   logged on (and someone came by and sent the message), or someone may
   have forged their address, so you don't want to be too vindictive on
   the first mailing. In your message, you should forward the COMPLETE
   message received, including all headers. For some sites, you may need
   to send mail to an address other than postmaster. Usually, the site
   provides an alternate address, such as abuse@... Here are some for the
   more common internet service providers: abuse@netcom.com
   
   If the mail you received contains specific threats against you, you
   should consider contacting your site security office, if you have one.
   In addition to contacting the postmaster, you should also report the
   incident to Jewish organizations that keep track of antisemitic
   activites. Such sites include the following:

     * Simon Wisenthal Center (www.wiesenthal.com). The Simon Wiesenthal
       Center is an international center for Holocaust remembrance and
       the defense of human rights and the Jewish people.

     * Anti-Defamation League (www.adl.org). The mission of the
       Anti-Defamation League is to stop the defamation of the Jewish
       people, to secure justice and fair treatment to all citizens
       alike.
       
   If you have suggestions for additional sites to add to this list,
   please contact the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 1.21: What are the Do's and Don'ts?

Answer:
   
   Here's a summary.

     * Learn about Usenet before you post.

     * Follow S.C.J and read news.announce.newusers.

     * Use the appropriate newsgroups: Israeli politics belongs on
       "soc.culture.israel" or "talk.politics.mideast"; Holocaust denyers
       belong on "alt.revisionism"; Messianics belong on "alt.messianic";
       Middle east politics belongs on "talk.politics.mideast";
       discussions about Turkey and Armenia belong on
       "soc.culture.turkish".

     * Know your audience and make your posts understandable.

     * Trim quoted material whenever possible, and try to ensure there is
       content in your posting (except, perhaps, during the month of
       Adar)

     * Direct specific halachic questions to rabbis, but you can discuss
       the general concept on S.C.J.

     * Do post divrey Torah [short sermons on Jewish topics].

     * Don't challenge the validity of Judaism or assert the superiority
       of other religions and prophets thereof.

     * Don't write "lashon hara" [true slander] or "motzei sheim ra"
       [false slander].

     * Don't start posting until you've finished reading this FAQ.
       
   The following is some good advice on writing articles that move
   discussion forward in a positive manner. These suggestions apply not
   only to soc.culture.jewish, but to any newsgroup in which you might
   participate:
    1. State your position (act); don't respond to a previous posting
       (react).
    2. State what you think in a positive manner, not why some other
       poster is wrong. Contrast: Dubaldie was wrong when he said that
       ... to I believe that ...
    3. Trim included material as much as possible.
    4. If you can respond to a question in email, please do so. If you're
       looking for information, offer to collect responses via Email and
       post a summary.
    5. Congratulations! and other one line posts in response to
       announcements should always be done in email.
    6. Signatures should be 4 lines or less. Some posting software will
       enforce this.
    7. You don't need to respond to every article; choose your responses
       carefully.
    8. Treat your fellow posters with the same respect with which you
       would like them to treat you.
    9. Let subjects die gracefully. When you post, consider whether you
       are really *adding* something to the discussion.
   10. Avoid unsubstantiated statements that you cannot back up with
       citations. In a similar fashion, avoid the use of stereotypes. For
       example, not all Jews with beards are Orthodox, and not all
       secular Jews are Reform.
   11. Review your postings before pressing the send sequence. It is
       worth the time to spell check your post, and re-read it to make
       sure you're not saying something stupid. Reading an article isn't
       mandatory; if your article is attractive, it is more likely to be
       read.
   12. When a poster is making a fool of themselves, don't jump in. Let
       their words demonstrate the quality of their thoughts.
   13. Remember to leave room for all voices. It's good to be active on
       the group, but don't let your activity crowd out others. A good
       practice is to read all postings for a given day before writing
       any responses.
   14. Even though you may disagree with a poster or a poster's practice,
       show respect for that person. This is really a corallary of "act,
       don't react". Instead of "reacting" to what the poster said by
       negating their statements, "act" by stating positively what you
       believe.
   15. Remember to edit the subject line to keep it relevant to the
       posting.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Copyright Notice

   The soc.culture.jewish FAQ and reading lists are not to be reproduced
   for commercial use unless the party reproducing the FAQ agrees to the
   following:
    1. Use of latest version. They will contact the FAQ maintainer
       (maintainer@scjfaq.org) to obtain the latest version for their
       collection.
    2. Tell us where it is. They will provide the FAQ maintainer
       (maintainer@scjfaq.org) with information on what collection the
       copy of the FAQ is in, and how that collection may be obtained.
    3. No modifications. They will agree, in writing, that the FAQ will
       be included in the collection without modification, and that
       acknowledgements of contributors to the FAQ remain in the FAQ.
    4. Don't make money off of it. They will agree, in writing, that the
       collection including the FAQ will be distributed on either a
       non-profit basis, or have some percentage of profit donated to
       Tzedakah (Charity)
       
   To support this, this FAQ is Compilation Copyright (c) 1993 through 2000
   by Daniel P. Faigin (the FAQ maintainer) on behalf of
   soc.culture.jewish.
------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.26 07:18

End of S.C.J FAQ Part 1 (FAQ Intro and S.C.J Newsgroups) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:07 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yh-000OVvC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:07 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05131
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:25 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 16BB17A13F
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:13 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 107177A143
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:12 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28104 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:37 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:37 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032537.28103.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 02-Who-We-Are
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 85230
Lines: 1709

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Who We Are (2/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.2>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/02-Who-We-Are
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Information on the breakdown of the group and Jewish movements
Message-ID: <faq.2_970164421@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/02-Who-We-Are
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.02-Who-We-Are
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
             Part 2: Who We Are: The Group and Jewish Movements
                    [Last Post: Thu Sep 28 11:07:07 US/Pacific 2000]


   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                 Section 2:
                                 Who We Are
                                      
    1. Who reads the soc.culture.jewish newsgroups?
    2. What are the major Jewish movements?
    3. What is Conservative Judaism?
    4. What is Orthodox Judaism?
    5. What is Reform/Progressive Judaism?
    6. What about other movements?
    7. What are some of the Orthodox sub-groups?
    8. What is Chassidism and how does it differ from other Orthodox
       groups?
    9. What is Lubavitch Chasidism and Chabad?
   10. What is Breslov Chasidism?
   11. What is Satmar Chasidism?
   12. What other forms of Chasidism?
   13. What are OCR (O-C-R) wars? Why all the flames?
   14. But Reform Judaism isn't Judaism? Why don't they see that?
   15. But Orthodox Judaism isn't Judaism? Why don't they see that?
   16. Why shouldn't I say "ultra-Orthodox", "Reformed Judaism", or
       "Humanist Judaism"?
   17. How does a Chassid differ from Misnagid?
   18. What is a "Torah Jew?" 
   19. What about homosexual Jews?
   20. Is it true that Jews are all (fill-in-the-blank)?
   21. How many Jews are there today in the U.S.A.?


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.1: Who reads the soc.culture.jewish newsgroups?

Answer:
   
   Qualitatively? We have men and women who have outstanding Jewish
   educations, and who are willing to take the time to share their
   knowledge. We have serious non-observant Jews seeking deeper Jewish
   roots. We have Jews still trying to see exactly where they fit it,
   Jews who are struggling, and learning, and actively improving
   themselves. Some reply carefully and kindly; others use their wits
   like scalpels, cutting away at the first sign of nonsense. We have
   talented writers, whose prose is often poetic. Counted among us are
   Hassidic Jews, Orthodox, Conservative, Reform, Reconstructionist, and
   miscellaneous Jews. We've got atheists and secularists, Hebraists and
   Yiddishists. And we are all learning from one another and teaching one
   another.
   
   Quantitatively? This is difficult to answer. When Usenet was smaller,
   surveys were done of the newsgroup to try to determine the
   denominational breakdown of the readership. This survey involved
   regular postings to the newsgroup, together with periodic mail sent to
   newsgroup participants. Nowadays, some of the approaches taken in
   conducting the survey (i.e., the sending of notes to newsgroup readers
   unsolicited) would be considered to be spam. So a survey hasn't been
   done recently. Note: If you are interested in conducting one, please
   contact the FAQ maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>, and he will be
   glad to provide you with the scripts and ideas from the last survey.
   
   What did the last survey say? First, note that it only applied to
   S.C.J, and was last conducted in 1995, well over 5 years ago. There
   were just under 332 respondants (or approximately 1% of the readership
   at that time). This survey showed the following breakdowns:
                                  1995     1993       1991       1989
    JC [Conservative        ]:   30.12%   22.06%     28.98%     37.12%
    JO [Orthodox            ]:   27.11%   31.62%     36.33%     29.55%
    JL [Liberal/Reform      ]:   13.86%   12.87%     10.20%     11.36%
    JS [Secular/Humanistic  ]:    5.72%    5.15%      3.67%      2.27%
    JR [Reconstructionist   ]:    5.42%    2.21%      1.63%      1.52%
    JU [Unspecified Jewish  ]:    4.22%    4.78%      2.86%      N/A
    JN [Non-Affiliated      ]:    3.01%    4.04%      2.45%      0.76%
    AA [Agnostic or Atheist ]:    3.01%    2.94%      0.82%      6.06%
    OT [Other               ]:    2.41%    3.68%      4.49%      0.76%
    JT [Traditional         ]:    1.51%    3.68%      N/A        N/A
    CF [Christian Fndmntlist]:    0.90%    1.47%      3.67%      N/A
    CM [Christian Mainstream]:    0.60%    0.74%      2.04%      N/A
    CC [Catholic            ]:    0.30%    1.84%      1.22%      N/A
    CO [Christian Other     ]:    0.30%    1.47%      1.22%      N/A
    HI [Hindu               ]:    0.00%    0.37%      N/A        N/A

Gross Breakdown:
    J [Jewish          ]:        91.87%   86.40%     86.12%     82.58%
    A [Atheist/Agnostic]:         3.01%    2.94%      0.82%      6.06%
    O [Other           ]:         2.41%    3.68%      4.49%      0.76%
    C [Christian       ]:         2.11%    5.51%      8.16%      N/A
    H [Hindu           ]:         0.00%    0.37%      N/A        N/A

   It is interesting to contrast these numbers with the results mentioned
   in Question 2.21.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.2: What are the major Jewish movements?

Answer:
   
   The three major denominations in Judaism are, in alphabetical order,
   Conservative Judaism, Orthodox Judaism, and Reform/Progressive
   Judaism.
   
   Outside of the United States and Israel, the distinction tends to be
   along Orthodox/Liberal lines. Outside of North America, the equivalent
   of North American Reform Judaism is called Progressive or Liberal
   Judaism. Outside of North America, the equivalent of North American
   Conservative Judaism is called "Reform" or "Masorti", although there
   are differences in all cases from the North American versions. To be
   more specific, all synagogues associated with the movement in North
   and South America are called 'Conservative', all synagoues in Israel
   and England are called 'Masorti', and all synagogues in Hungary are
   called 'Neolog'. Note that the Neolog movement developed independently
   of the rest of Conservative Judaism. Their philosophy was also based
   on the work of Rabbi Zecharias Frankel, the founder of the
   Positive-Historical school of thought (Mid 1800s, Germany, Breslau).
   The evolution of their school of thought basically followed the same
   path as the Conservative movement, and in recent years they have
   formalized this by joining the World Council of Conservative/Masorti
   Synagogues.
   
   With respect to the United Kingdom, there are about 24 synangogues
   that are officially part of The World Council of Conservative/Masorti
   Synangogues, and all of these synangogues refer to themselves as
   'Masorti'. Most of them even have the word 'Masorti' in their name.
   Their philosophy is identical to that of Conservative Jews in the US -
   and Masorti Jews in Israel - and almost all of their rabbis (perhaps
   even all by now) are officially members of the Conservative movement's
   Rabbinical Assembly.
   
   In Israel, the Conservative and Reform movements are very small
   (although they do exist). Rather, the split tends to be along
   secular/non-secular lines, with further internal devisions with the
   non-secular adherents. An estimated breakdown might be 30% secular,
   50% traditional (those who keep some Mitzvot), and 30% religious.
   These numbers have been provided by Hillel Applebaum
   (alpebaum@cs.huji.ac.il) and are being reinvestigated because they add
   up to over 100%. This breakdown may be misleading, because the Mitzvot
   observed by the majority of "traditional" Israelis include some that
   are imposed by secular law (Jewish marriage and divorce) and others
   that have been adopted voluntarily because of their social, cultural,
   and/or national content (e.g. Passover Seder, Chanukah candles).
   Conversely, most members of this group do not keep the Mitzvot that
   are considered by non-secular Jews to lie at the heart of Judaism:
   Shabbat (observance of the Sabbath) and Kashruth (observance of the
   dietary laws), and should therefore be regarded as "nearly secular"
   rather than "moderately religious".
   
   There are also a fourth movement which is considered major by some:
   Reconstructionist. It is an offshoot of Conservative.
   
   Note: "Messianic Judaism[sic]" and other groups accepting the tenets
   of Christianity are not Jewish movements.
   
   Sephardic(Southern European/Spanish/North African) Orthodox tend not
   to bother with liberal/traditional distinctions as much as Ashkenazi
   (Northern European/Franco-German/Russian) Jews.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.3: What is Conservative Judaism?

Answer:
   Conservative Judaism attempts to combine a positive attitude toward
   modern culture, acceptance of critical secular scholarship regarding
   Judaism's sacred texts, and also commitment to Jewish observance.
   Conservative Judaism believes that scholarly study of Jewish texts
   indicates that Judaism has constantly been evolving to meet the needs
   of the Jewish people in varying circumstances, and that a central
   halachic authority can continue the halachic evolution today.
   
    Attitude Toward Halacha
    
   Conservative Judaism affirms that the halachic process reflects the
   Divine will. It makes use of Solomon Schechter's concept of "Klal
   Yisrael" (the whole of the (observant) Jewish community), in that
   decisions on Jewish Law are largely determined by the practices of
   Klal Yisrael.
   
   In Conservative Judaism, the central halachic authority of the
   movement, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS), will often
   set out more than one acceptable position. In such a case, the rabbi
   of the congregation (mara d'atra) is free to choose from the range of
   acceptable positions (or none of them), and his congregation is
   expected to abide by his choice. The CJLS speaks for the Conservative
   movement and offers parameters to guide local rabbis who turn to it
   for assistance. Local rabbis will make use of traditional sources and,
   when available, teshuvot written for the CJLS.
   
   An exception is made in the case of "standards". A "standard" requires
   an 80% (not unanimous) vote of the membership of the CJLS (not just
   those in attendance) and a majority vote by the plenum of the
   Rabbinical Assembly. Willful violations have led to resignations or
   expulsions from membership of the Rabbinical Assembly (RA). At
   present, there are four standards:
    1. A complete prohibition on rabbis and cantors to officiate in any
       way at intermarriages.
    2. A complete prohibition against officiating at the remarriage of a
       Jew whose previous marriage has not been halakhically terminated,
       whether by a halakhic divorce [get], hafka'at Kiddushin [annulment
       of the marriage], or death.
    3. A complete prohibition against taking any action that would
       intimate that native Jewishness can be confirmed in any way but
       matrilineal descent.
    4. A complete prohibition against supervising a conversion to Judaism
       that does not include circumcision for males, and immersion in a
       mikveh for both males and females.
       
    Conservative Theology
    
   Conservative Judaism hold that the laws of the Torah and Talmud are of
   divine origin, and thus mandates the following of Halakha (Jewish
   law). At the same time, the Conservative movement recognizes the human
   element in the Torah and Talmud, and accepts modern scholarship which
   shows that Jewish writings also show the influence of other cultures,
   and in general can be treated as historical documents.
   
   The movement believes that God is real and that God's will is made
   known to humanity through revelation. The revelation at Sinai was the
   clearest and most public of such divine revelations, but revelation
   also took place with other people - called prophets - and in a more
   subtle form, and can happen even today.
   
   These concepts are very complex, and readers are referred to Emet
   VeEmunah, published jointly by the Rabbinical Assembly and USCJ.
   
   Many people misinterpret Conservative Judaism as being like Reform
   Judaism except with more Hebrew in its services; They believe that if
   one simply goes to a Conservative synagogue, then one is a
   Conservative Jew. This of course is not true, and the movement's
   leadership is strongly concerned with whether or not the next
   generation of Conservative Jews will have the commitment to lead an
   authentic Jewish lifestyle.
   
    Derivation of the Movement's Name
    
   The name derives from the idea that the movement would be necessary to
   conserve Jewish traditions in the U.S., a culture in which Reform and
   Orthodoxy were not believed to be viable.
   
    Conservative Judaism in Israel
    
   Conservative Judaism begun to make its presence known in Israel before
   the 1960s. Today, there are over 40 congregations with over 12,000
   affiliates. In 1962 the Seminary began creating Neve Schechter, the
   University's Jerusalem campus. This center houses the Schocken Center
   for Jewish Research, and the Saul Liberman Institute for Talmudic
   Research. In 1975 a new Rabbinical School curriculum instituted a year
   of study in Israel as a requirement for every seminary rabbinical
   student.
   
   In 1979 Chancellor Gerson Cohen announced the creation of the Masorti
   (Traditional) movement as Israel's own indigenous Conservative
   movement, with its own executive director, board and executive
   committee. Today the Masorti movement is an independent Israeli
   organization, that is parallel to, and not a subset of, the USCJ.
   There is cooperation on a large number of projects and issues. Many
   members of the Masorti movement are also members of the Rabbinical
   Assembly (RA).
   
   The Masorti movement created MERCAZ, a party within the structure of
   the World Zionist Organization. The Conservative movement is thus
   officially represented in the centers of decision making within the
   Zionist movement.
   
   The Masorti movement sponsors youth groups, an overnight camp, a
   system of day camps, Kibbutz Hanaton and its Education Center and
   Moshav Shorashim, and special programs teaching new Russian and
   Ethiopian olim (immigrants) basic Judaism. It is involved in many
   issues promoting the rights of non-orthodox, traditional Jews.
   
   The movement also sponsors "The Center for Conservative Judaism in
   Jerusalem" 2 Agron Street, P.O. Box 7456, Jerusalem 94265. Phone
   02-257-463 FAX 972-02-234127. The Center provides activities and
   resources such as: daily study Havurot; headquarters for the Israel
   operations of USY; campus outreach programs at Israeli universities; a
   resource center for those making Aliyah from our Movement; A youth
   hostel, the "Neshama" program for Schechter High School Seniors as
   well a variety of educational programs. Adjacent to the Center is
   Congregation Moreshet Israel providing daily, Shabbat, and festival
   services. The Center will provide outreach to movement members of all
   ages who are in Israel, including home hospitality, and support
   whenever needed.
   
    Sources of More Information
    
   Additional information may be found in the Conservative Reading List,
   available at www.scjfaq.org/rl/jcu-index.html or via the SCJFAQ
   autoretriever. Also worth exploring is the home page for the United
   Synagogues of Conservative Judaism (UCSJ) <http://www.uscj.org>.
   Another source of information is the Conservative and Masorti Judaism
   FAQs.*
   
   [*: This source is controversial on soc.culture.jewish. There do not
   appear to be major disputes with its representations of
   Conservative/Masorti positions. However, some on the newsgroup dispute
   its representation of the positions of other movements.]
   
   For more information on Masorti, see <http://www.masorti.org/>.
   
   Interested readers might also want to look at the following documents
   available via WWW:

     * Ismar Schorsch's "Core Values" of Conservative Judaism (a
       synopsis) (<http://www.jtsa.edu/pubs/misc/core.html>)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.4: What is Orthodox Judaism?

Answer:
   
   Orthodox Judaism is not a unified movement with a single governing
   body, but rather many different movements adhering to common
   principles. All of the Orthodox movements are very similar in their
   observance and beliefs, differing only in the details that are
   emphasized. They also differ in their attitudes toward modern culture
   and the state of Israel. They all share one key feature: a dedication
   to Torah, both Written and Oral.
   
    Origins of the Movement
    
   Historically, there was no such thing as Orthodoxy; in fact, you find
   the particular term is used primarily in North America (elsewhere, the
   distinction is primarily between "more observant" and "less
   observant"). The specific term "Orthodox Judaism" is of rather recent
   origin and is used more as a generic term to differentiate the
   movements following traditional practices from the Liberal Jewish
   movements.
   
    Orthodox Theology
    
   Orthodox Judaism views itself as the continuation of the beliefs and
   practices of normative Judaism, as accepted by the Jewish nation at
   Mt. Sinai and codified in successive generations in an ongoing process
   that continues to this day.
   
   Orthodox Judaism believes that both the Written and Oral Torah are of
   divine origin, and represent the word of G-d. This is similar to the
   view of the Conservative movement, but the Orthodox movement holds
   that such information (except for scribal errors) is the exact word of
   God, and does not represent any human creativity or influence. For the
   details of the Orthodox view of the origin of Torah, see Section 3.4.
   For the Orthodox, the term "Torah" refers to the "Written Law" as
   interpreted by the "Oral Law", interpreted in turn by the Rishonim
   (Medieval commentators), and eventually codified in the Codices: R.
   Joseph Karo's Shul`han Arukh and/or R. Moshe Isserlis's Mapah (printed
   as parenthetical text in the Shul`han Arukh). As practical questions
   arise, Orthodox Authorities apply the Halachic process (the system of
   legal reasoning and interpretation described in the Oral Torah) using
   the Torah (both Oral and Written) to determine how best to live in
   accordance with G-d's will as directed by the Halacha. In this way,
   Orthodoxy evolves to meet the demands of the times.
   
   An excellent summary of the core beliefs of Orthodox Judaism may be
   found in the Rambam's 13 Principles of Faith. [For those reading the
   posted version of this, they may be found in Section 4.7 of the FAQ]
   
   One of the hallmarks of Orthodox Jews is an openness (and
   encouragement) to question what it is that G-d requires of us, and
   then to answer those questions within the system that G-d gave us.
   
   In addition, among the major movements only Orthodoxy has preserved
   the "mystical" foundations of Jewish theology, most obviously in the
   Chasidic movements though no less so in many Yeshivah movements, both
   Ashkenazi and Sephardi.
   
    Sources for More Information
    
   Additional information may be found in the Traditional Reading List,
   found at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/jtu-index.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.5: What is Reform/Progressive Judaism?

Answer:
   
   Reform is the most liberal of the major movements within Judaism
   today. It started in the 1800s in Germany during the emancipation, and
   encouraged examination of religion with an eye towards rationality and
   egalitarianism. Viewed from the light of today's Reform practice, the
   original adherents went a little-too-far; often, this early form
   (which lasted until the 1960s, in some respects) is referred to as
   "Classic German Reform".
   
    Reform Theology
    
   Reform differs from the other major movements in that it views both
   the Oral and Written laws as a product of Man's hand (specifically, it
   views the Torah as Divinely inspired, but written in the language of
   the time in which it was given). The laws reflect their times, but
   contain many timeless truths. The Reform movement stresses retention
   of the key principles of Judaism (as it sees them; for details,
   consult the Reform Reading List). As for practice, it strongly
   recommends individual study of the traditional practices; however, the
   adherent is free to follow only those practices that increase the
   sanctity of their relationship to G-d. Reform also stresses equality
   between Men and Women. The current statement of principles of Reform
   may be found in the 1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html), and in the 1976
   Centenary Perspective
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html). Reform is recently
   rededicating itself to Torah and education. This is emphasized in the
   installation speech of the current president of the Union of American
   Hebrew Congregations (the Reform congregational arm), Rabbi Eric
   Yoffie. The speech may be found at (<http://uahc.org/yinaug.html>)
   
   Reform requires familiarity with the laws before choosing not to
   observe them. A non-observant Jew unfamiliar with the laws would not
   be a "serious" Reform Jew. Also, Reform rejects the faith tenets of
   other religions as a matter of first principles.
   
   It should be noted that many of the paths taken by the Reform movement
   differ from those of traditional Judaism. These differences result in
   many of the discussions you will see on S.C.J.
   
    Size of the Movement
    
   In terms of size, the UAHC 1993-1994 annual report notes that there
   were a total of 853 UAHC-affiliated congregations, with a total
   reported congregational membership of 302,193 member units (families,
   singles, etc.). This can be contrasted with the 1983-1984 period,
   where there were 773 congregations with a total of 269,406 member
   units. Congregations range in size from a 2-member-unit congregation
   in Port Gibson, Mississippi, to "mega"-shuls such as Wilshire Blvd
   Temple in Los Angeles (2,123 member units), Anshe Chesed in Cleveland
   Ohio (2,151), Holy Blossom Temple in Toronto Ontario (2,043), Temple
   Israel in Minneapolis Minnesota (2,075), Washington Hebrew
   Congregation in Washington DC (2,783), Congregation Emanu-El in New
   York City (2,650), Temple Israel in W. Bloomfield Michigan (2,659),
   Temple Emanu-El in Dallas Texas (2,526), and Cong. Beth Israel in
   Houston Texas (2,011).
   
    Sources of More Information
    
   This FAQ contains much additional detail on Reform, it's theology,
   it's origins, and how it has changes from its more "rejectionist"
   beginnings. This information may be found in the Reform/Progressive
   portion of this FAQ. For further reading, consult the Reform Reading
   List.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.6: What about other movements?

Answer:
   
    Reconstructionism
    
   Philosophically, Reconstructionism has its roots in the work of
   Mordechai Kaplan, who argued for a naturalistic conception of God and
   a functionalist view of Judaism as a religious civilization. He
   acknowledged that Jewish communities have always evolved to adapt to
   their historical circumstances, and was particularly interested in the
   ways in which American Judaism could construct communities that would
   permit its members to live in two civilizations (American and Jewish)
   at once, participating fully in each of them.
   
   Kaplan's conception of G-d was a transnatural one -- he spoke of "the
   power in the Universe that makes for salvation", rather than an
   anthropomorphic G-d intervening to reward and punish. As a result, the
   tradition we have inherited (e.g. keeping shabbat and kashrut, the
   text of our liturgy, etc.) is our cultural inheritance of how our
   ancestors related to this power in the universe -- it is not an
   unchanging divine mandate. Our tradition should, indeed must, be
   reconstructed in each generation to reflect our own understanding of
   this relationship -- as Kaplan said, "The past has a vote, not a
   veto."
   
      Reconstructionist Theology
      
   Kaplan's conception of God spoke of "the power in the Universe that
   makes for salvation", rather than an anthropomorphic God intervening
   to reward and punish. By salvation, he meant the power to improve
   oneself, not any sort of religious salvation.
   
   The philosophy of the movement contains a principle called
   "Transvaluation". This means that any person (at least the leaders of
   the movement) have the right to re-define a word to make it mean what
   they want. Kaplan did not believe in God, but he did believe that
   nature existed; he also believed that the universe was open to the
   possibility that people could better themselves. Kaplan "transvalued"
   the word "God" to mean the nature of the world. As a result, people
   who no longer believed in the traditional Jewish conception of God
   could now call themselves "religious" and could say that they "believe
   in God". This system proved quite appealing to a large number of
   people who had a deep love for the Jewish way of life, but who were
   not religious in the traditional sense.
   
      Reconstructionism Today
      
   Kaplan's personal theology was extremely rationalistic, but in forming
   his movement's seminary he probably did not realize the long term
   effects. He set up a seminary in which people could train to be
   Reconstructionist rabbis. In doing so he encouraged the study of
   religious texts, even if he himself discouraged what most people would
   call "religion". What eventually began to happen was obvious in
   hindsight: Hundreds of committed Jews studied for years in a religious
   environment, and they began to do what Kaplan rejected his whole life:
   They began to believe in the traditional Jewish God, especially as God
   was envisioned by the Medieval Kabbalists. As a result, many people in
   the Reconstructionist community now have a traditional Jewish belief
   in God!
   
   One hallmark of the Reconstructionist community has been its
   flourishing creativity. It has been at the forefront of many modern
   trends in Judaism, especially in the egalitarian approach to religious
   life and liturgy.
   
   In terms of size, the Reconstructionist movement is smaller than the
   Reform or Conservative movements. Reconstructionist communities are
   generally quite spiritually open, and quite accepting of
   experimentation.
   
      Where to Get More Information
      
   The organization of Reconstructionist Congregations is called the
   Jewish Reconstruction Federation <http://www.jrf.org>.
   
   Additional information may be found in the Reconstructionist Reading
   List, available at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/jrc-index.html..
   
    Traditional Judaism (formerly "Conservadox")
    
   This is a primarily North American movement that has nothing in common
   with "traditional" Jews in Israel. It is a relatively new offshoot
   from Conservative, but philosophically closer to Orthodox. They
   attempt to be as lenient as possible within an Orthodox framework,
   although many Orthodox would not accept their leniencies, such as
   using microphones on shabbat. It has yet to be determined if
   conversions and divorces under Traditional auspices are acceptable
   within the Orthodox world.
   
   There is an umbrella organization for the organized "Traditional"
   movement (please contrast this usage with the generic term
   "traditional"). This organization is the Union for Traditional
   Judaism. More information can be found on their home page,
   http://www.utj.org/home.
   
    Humanistic Judaism
    
   Humanistic Judaism practices a non-theistic form of Judaism. For those
   involved in Humanistic Judaism, Judaism is the culture and the
   historical experience of the Jewish people. Jewish history has taught
   us to rely on human power to discover truth. It is a break from both
   Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism because it does not use theistic
   language in its liturgy.
   
   Humanistic Judaism acknowledges that it is possible to integrate
   knowledge of and respect for other beliefs into the education of a
   child being raised in Humanistic Judaism, without confusing or
   intermingling distinct and different religious traditions, and without
   mixing or compromising the child's identification with Judaism.
   Specifically, the Jewish members of a mixed family may participate in
   the cultural observances of the non-Jewish members as guests of the
   latter, not as celebrants. Humanistic Judaism does not approve of the
   concept of mixing or joining religious identities with other faiths.
   Additional information may be found in the Humanistic Reading List,
   available at www.scjfaq.org/rl/jsh-index.html. A web page of links and
   information about Humanistic Judaism is available at URL:
   <http://www.teleport.com/~hellman>.
   
   You can also contact:

     * Society for Humanistic Judaism
       28611 W. Twelve Mile Road
       Farmington Hills MI 48334

       +1 810 478-7610
       
   or drop a note to info@shj.org (Society for Humanistic Judaism). Home
   page: www.shj.org. There is an electronic mailing list for those with
   an interest in exploring and/or furthering the development of
   Humanistic Judaism. To subscribe, send an email message to
   <majordomo@teleport.com> with your first and last name as the subject
   line, and the following two lines in the body of the message:
   
   subscribe hj
   end
   
   Readers interested in Humanistic Judaism might also want to contact
   the sister organization to SHJ, the Congress of Secular Jewish
   Organizations (www.csjo.org). Written inquiries may be sent to:

     * Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations
       19657 Villa Drive North
       Southfield, MI 48076

       +1 248 569-8127

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.7: What are some of the Orthodox sub-groups?

Answer:
   
   The term "Traditional" has often been used as a synonym for Orthodox
   (especially when using the dichotomy Traditional/Liberal). However in
   recent years this useage has become less common: A faction broke off
   from the Conservative movement, and took the name "The Union for
   Traditional Judaism" (UTJ); its members are known as Traditional Jews.
   Nowadays, UTJ's practices are consistent with Modern Orthodoxy and UTJ
   is not part of the Conservative movement in any way. It is now part of
   Modern Orthodoxy.
   
   Note also that the Conservative movement in Israel and Europe is
   called Masorti (Traditional) Judaism. As such, fewer people use the
   term "traditional" without additional qualification, so as to avoid
   confusion. In the FAQ, the term "traditional" (little-t) is used in
   the generic sense, while "Traditional" (big-T) is used to refer to
   UTJ. "Masorti" is used to the Conservative Movement in Israel and
   Europe.
   
   The following are some of the major divisions within Orthodoxy:
   
   "Centrist/modern/cosmopolitan" (colloquially [sometimes pejorative,
   sometimes affectionate] "kipa sruga" [crocheted skull cap]) Orthodox
   usually mean an Orthodoxy which approves of many aspects of secular
   culture, especially secular education, in addition to traditional
   Torah study. They tend to be Zionist. The precise term depends on the
   speaker - R' Norman Lamm uses "centrist," R' Shlomo Riskin uses
   "cosmopolitan" and R' Emmanuel Rackman uses "modern." The Union of
   Orthodox Jewish Congregations, Yeshiva University, and the Rabbinical
   Council of America in some sense represents this group. In Israel, the
   Mizrachi organization is a well-known representative.
   
   Some of the Liberal Orthodox/Open Orthodox/Modern Orthodox groups
   include:

     * Edah (http://www.edah.org/); 47 West 34th Street, Suite 700; New
       York, NY 10001; (212) 244-7501; Fax: (212) 244-7855.

     * OzVe Shalom-Netivot Shalom (Israel).
       (http://www.ariga.com/ozveshalom/)

     * The Shalom Hartman Institute (Israel).
       (http://www.jajz-ed.org.il/hartman/) 12 G'dalyahu Alon St.,
       Jerusalem, Israel Tel: 02-5675320 FAX: 02-5611913 E-Mail:
       shi@shi.org.il

     * Meimad (Israel). (http://www.meimad.org.il/)

     * The Orthodox Caucus. (http://www.orthodoxcaucus.org/)

     * Jewish Orthodox Feminists Alliance (http://www.jofa.org/)
       
   Modern/Centrist Orthodox groups include the following:

     * The Union for Orthodox Congregations (OU) and the Rabbinical
       Council of America (RCA). http://www.ou.org

     * The National Council for Young Israel, and the Council of Young
       Israel Rabbis. http://youngisrael.org/

     * The United Synagogue of England.
       http://www.brijnet.org/us/index.htm
       
   "Yeshivish" (colloquially, [sometimes pejorative, sometimes
   affectionate] "black hat" or "black") suggests an Orthodox outlook in
   which the focus of life is Torah study, as is done in Lithuanian-style
   Yeshivos. Secular culture is either tolerated or criticized for its
   corrupting influences. This group tends to be "non-Zionist" in the
   sense that they love the land of Israel and its holiness (many spend
   years in Israel for Torah study), but are unenthusiastic about secular
   Zionism and Israeli secular culture. Agudath Israel tends to represent
   this group.
   
   Some examples of such Orthodox groups include the following:

     * The Rabbinical Alliance of the Commonwealth of Independent States
       (One of the rabbinic organizations in the former Soviet Union)
       http://www.fjc.ru/alliance.htm.

     * The Chief Rabbinate of Israel
       http://www.israel-mfa.gov.il/gov/relaffs.html

     * Agudath Israel of America; 84 William St., New York, NY 10038;
       (212) 797-9000

     * Agudath HaRabonim - The Union of Orthodox Rabbis Of The United
       States and Canada, 235 East Broadway, New York, NY 10002; (212)
       964-6337, (212) 964-6338
       
   The Chassidic style of Orthodox Judaism is described in a later
   section.
   
   In Israel, the "Dati/Chareidi" distinction is more a matter of
   attitude towards Zionism than of political affiliation or religious
   views. The Dati tend to be more supportive of Zionism, with the
   Chareidi not having much belief in the modern Jewish state. Please
   note that these are general positions; individual members may hold
   different views and your milage may vary.
   
   Some other useful resources to explore the wide variety of Orthodox
   Judaism include:

     * Prof. Eli Segal's "Varieties of Orthodox Judaism"
       (http://www.acs.ucalgary.ca/~elsegal/363_Transp/08_Orthodoxy.html)
       . This web page contains detailed entries on: Hasidism, The
       Opposition to Hasidism: Misnagdim, Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch and
       Neo-Orthodoxy, Lithuanian Hasidism: Chabad Lubavitch, The
       Lithuanian Yeshivahs, Rabbi Israel Salanter and the Musar
       (Ethical) Movement, The Aguddat Israel Movement, Orthodox Zionism,
       American Centrist/Modern Orthodoxy, Orthodox Anti-Zionism: Naturei
       Karta, Rabbi Eliezer Shach and Lithuanian Anti-Zionism, Sepharadic
       Orthodox Movements, and Messianic Orthodoxy: Gush Emunim.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.8: What is Chassidism and how does it differ from other
         Orthodox groups?

Answer:
   
   The Chassidic movement started in the 1700's (Common Era) in Eastern
   Europe in response to a void felt by many average observant Jews of
   the day. The founder of Chassidism, Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov
   (referred to as the "Besht," an acronym of his name) was a great
   scholar and mystic, devoted to both the revealed, outer aspect, and
   hidden, inner aspect of Torah. He and his followers, without veering
   from a commitment to Torah, created a way of Jewish life that
   emphasized the ability of all Jews to grow closer to G-d via
   everything that we do, say, and think. In contrast to the somewhat
   intellectual style of the mainstream Jewish leaders of his day and
   their emphasis on the primacy of Torah study, the Besht emphasized a
   constant focus on attachment to G-d and Torah no matter what one is
   involved with.
   
   After the Besht died in 1760, the leadership of the second generation
   of the movement passed to Dov Baer of Mezhirech. From his court
   students went forth who were successful in attracting many scholars to
   Chassidism and sending them to the master at Mezhirech to absorb his
   teaching. By the 1830s the main surge of the spread of Chassidism was
   over. By this time, it had become the way of life of the majority of
   Jews in the Ukraine, Galicia, and central Poland, and had sizable
   groups of followers in Belorussia-Lithuania and Hungary. With the
   great waves of emigration to the West from 1881, Chassidism was
   carried into Western Europe and especially to the United States.
   
   Early on, there was a schism between the Chassidic and non-Chassidic
   (i.e. Misnagdim, lit. 'opponents') Jewish movements, primarily over
   real or imagined issues of halachic observance. The opposition was
   based on concern that the Chassidim were neglecting the laws regarding
   appropriate times for prayer, and perhaps concern about the exuberance
   of Chassidic worship, or a concern that it might be an offshoot of
   false messiahs Shabbtai Zvi or Jacob Frank. Within a generation or two
   the rift was closed. Since then, many Chassidic practices have
   influenced the Misnagdim, while the Misnagdim, in turn, moderated some
   of the extremes of early Chassidism. Nevertheless, the dispute between
   particular groups of Chassidim and Misnagdim continues to this day,
   especially in Israel, and occasionally on soc.culture.jewish.
   
   In the period leading up to World War II, various chassidic sects
   entered the political life of modern states. However, after 1850 the
   expansion of Chassidism stopped. The ideas of the Enlightenment,
   national and socialist ideals, and the Zionist movements shook the
   traditional Jewish way of life. Chassidism opposed any change in the
   way of life and sheltered itself from new forces in Judaism.
   
   During the Holocaust the chassidic centers of Eastern Europe were
   destroyed. The masses of Chassidim perished and, together with them,
   most of the chassidic leaders. Many who survived who survived moved to
   Israel or America, and established new chassidic centers. In parallel,
   the philosophy of Martin Buber and Abraham Joshua Heschel, and the
   works of writers such as Peretz helped to mold a new generation of
   Chassidism, which had a considerable influence on modern Jewish
   culture and youth. Although some sects have remained self-segregated,
   many sects have become part of everyday modern life. Since the 1970s,
   Chassidism have maintained a period of expansion and development.
   
   Today, Chassidim are differentiated from other Orthodox Jews by their
   devotion to a dynastic leader (referred to as a "Rebbe"), their
   wearing of distinctive clothing, and a greater than average study of
   the inner aspects of Torah.
   
   There are perhaps a dozen major Chassidic movements today, the best
   known of which (with perhaps 100,000 followers) is the Lubavitch group
   headquartered in Brooklyn NY. Other groups include the Bobov,
   Bostoner, Belzer, Gerer, Satmar, Vizhnitz, Breslov, Puppa, Bianer,
   Munkacz, and Rimnitz. In Israel, the major Chassidic groups after the
   Lubavitch group are: Gor (-Gerer), Viznitz, and Bealz (=Belzer).
   
   Additional information may be found in the Chasidism Reading List,
   available at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/joc-index.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.9: What is Lubavitch Chasidism and Chabad?

Answer:
   
   Lubavitch Chasidism, most commonly presented through its
   organizational arm Chabad, is one of the better known groups within
   Chasidism (although there are others). It is an international movement
   with headquarters in Brooklyn, New York.
   
   Its major thrust focuses on observing for one's self and transmitting
   to others the beauty, depth, awareness and joy inherent in the
   Torah-true way of life. By doing so, it strives to revitalize Jewish
   life by intensifying the individual's relationship to G-d, and deep
   sense of devotion and love towards one's fellow man.
   
   The name Chabad (Chochmah, Binah, Daat) refers to the three
   intellectual sephiros (Divine Emanations); the philosophy of the
   founder, the Alter Rebbe, stressed the use of the intellect to guide
   the emotions. Thus, each individual chassid had to work on
   himself/herself, rather than simply rely on the Rebbe/Tzaddik's
   saintliness. Another name used in Lubavitch Chassidism is ChaGat
   (Chessed, Gevurah, Tiferes), which refers to the first three of the
   seven emotional sephiros/character attributes which derive from
   Chabad. The empahsis in Chagat Chassidus is on emotional fervor and
   devotion (the Baal Shem Tov's counter to the dry intellectualism
   mentioned earlier.) Consequently, a chassid must attach
   himself/herself to the Rebbe and let his righteousness carry the
   Chassid along.
   
   The Lubavitch Rebbe, as Nasi HaDor (leader of the generation) has the
   responsibility of setting the direction of the generation.
   
   Chabad-Lubavitch philosophy promotes an intellectual perspective that
   strives to helps an individual live in full accordance with the
   Torah-true way of life.
   
   Chabad-Lubavitch operates an extensive outreach effort to encourage
   Jews to return to traditional practices. As part of this effort,
   Chabad operates the Mitzvah Campaigns. The vanguard of the Mitzvah
   Campaigns are the "Mitzvah Tanks". The goal of the Mitzvah Campaign is
   to encourage Jews to perform 10 specific mitzvos, the intention being
   that through their fulfillment, the individual and the family will
   come to experience a deeper and more fulfilling relationship with
   their Jewish Heritage. These Mitzvot are:
    1. Ahavas Yisroel: The love of one's fellow Jew.
    2. Chinuch: Torah Education
    3. Torah Study.
    4. Tefillin: The donning of Tefillin, every weekday, by men and boys
       over 13.
    5. Mezuzoh: The Jewish Sign
    6. Tzedokoh: Giving charity every weekday.
    7. Posession of Jewish Holy Books
    8. Lighting Shabbos and Festival Candles. Chabad provides a Free
       Shabbat Kit, available by calling the Rebitzen at +1 310 326-8234.
       For Candle lighting times anywhere in the USA call 718-774-3000.
    9. Kashrus: The Jewish Dietary Laws
   10. Taharas Hamishpocho: The Torah perspective on married life
       
   Chabad also urges that efforts be made to inform the public at large
   about the nature and meaning of the Seven Laws of Noah. Additional
   information on the Noachide Laws may be found in Part 6 of the S.C.J
   FAQ, Question 12.19, "What does Judaism say about non-Jews?"
   
   Additional information on Chabad may be found in the Chassidic Reading
   List portion of the S.C.J FAQ.
   
   Chabad-Lubavitch is also reachable through the internet; for more
   information, send email to info@lubavitch.chabad.org. Information is
   also available via WWW or Mosaic via the following URL:
   http://www.chabad.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.10: What is Breslov Chasidism?

Answer:
   
   The Breslov (sometimes called Bratzlav) movement was founded by Rabbi
   Nachman of Breslov (1772-1810), who was the great-grandson of the Baal
   Shem Tov, the founder of Chassidism, through his granddaughter Feige.
   For this reason, Rebbe Nachman often called himself "Nachman, son of
   Feige." Today, Breslover Chassidim usually refer to him as "Rebbe
   Nachman" or simply "the Rebbe" (different from the Lubovitcher Rebbe
   described above). Rebbe Nachman is buried in the town of Uman,
   Ukraine. Each year there is a major pilgrimage of Breslover Chassidim
   and others, who travel to Uman to celebrate Rosh Hashanah near the
   gravesite. This custom dates back to the very beginning of the Breslov
   movement, when Rebbe Nachman's Chassidim would gather with him on Rosh
   Hashanah each year. After his death, his closest disciple, Rabbi
   Nathan of Nemirov, organized the first pilgrimage to Uman. During the
   Communist years, it was very difficult for Jews to travel to Uman but,
   with the fall of Communism in 1989, it became possible to make the
   pilgrimage again. On Rosh Hashanah 5758 (1997) an estimated 7000 Jews
   participated in this pilgrimage. Plans are currently under way to
   build a Breslov synagogue there. You can read about one Breslover
   Chassid's personal experiences in Uman at
   http://www.pinenet.com/~rooster/uman.html.
   
   Why "Breslov" and not "Bratzlav?" Because Breslov is not the same
   place as Bratzlav or Breslau or Bratislava, although all of these
   errors occur in academic works about Rebbe Nachman's life. The Breslov
   where Rebbe Nachman lived is a small Ukranian town, located on the Bug
   River, latitude 48.50 N longitude 28.55 E, midway between Tulchin to
   the south and Nemirov to the north; 9 miles or 15 kilometers from
   each. At the end of the eighteenth century, Breslov had a Jewish
   population of just over a thousand. It had a main synagogue and six
   small prayer houses, one of which was known as the Baal Shem Tov
   synagogue.
   
   Some people also see the name Breslov as a play on words in Askenazic
   Hebrew: "Bris lev" means "covenant (or circumcision) of the heart."
   The Breslov approach places great stress on serving G-d with joy and
   living life as intensely as possible. "It's a great mitzvah always to
   be happy," Rebbe Nachman taught.
   
   One distinctively Breslov practice is "hisboddidus" (hitbadedut),
   which literally means "to make yourself be in solitude." Hisboddidus
   is a personalized form of free-flowing prayer and meditation. In
   addition to the regular daily services in the prayerbook, Breslover
   Hasidim try to spend an hour alone with G-d each day, pouring out
   their thoughts and concerns in whatever language they speak, as if
   talking to a close personal friend. (One does not have to be a
   Breslover Chassid to practice this technique.)
   
   Rebbe Nachman stressed the importance of soul-searching. He always
   maintained that his high spiritual level was due to his own efforts,
   and not to his famous lineage or any circumstances of birth. He
   repeatedly insisted that all Jews could reach the same level as he,
   and spoke out very strongly against those who thought that the main
   reason for a Tzaddik's greatness was the superior level of his soul.
   "Everyone can attain the highest level," Rebbe Nachman taught, "It
   depends on nothing but your own free choice... for everything depends
   on a multitude of deeds." (See Rabbi Nachman's Wisdom, p.29)
   
   Although Rebbe Nachman died almost 200 years ago, he is still
   considered to be the leader of the movement through the guidance of
   his books and stories. Breslover Chassidim today do not have a "Rebbe
   in the flesh," and each individual Chassid is free to go to any Jewish
   guide or teacher he (or she) feels comfortable with. There is no
   single person or council of elders "in charge" of the Breslov
   movement, and there is no membership list.
   
   Further information about Breslov can be found in the reading list on
   Chassidism at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/joc-index.html and at the
   "Breslov -- Judaism with a Heart" website (http://www.breslov.com).
   The Breslov on the Internet page at has a link launcher to many other
   Breslov-related sites.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.11: What is Satmar Chasidism?

Answer:
   
   Satmar is another major form of Chasidism. The name comes from the
   city of Satu Mare, in present-day Romania. Alas, I have no more
   information. Satmar once had a website at www.satmar.com, but that
   appears to be down.
   
   Satmar Chasids venerate the thought of their previous Rebbe R' Yoel
   Teitelbaum. His major work was the Kuntress "Vayoel Moshe", in which
   he lays out his theory on the 'Three Oaths' that according to him
   forbid a Jew from creating a Jewish state in Eretz Yisroel before the
   coming of moshiach. His thought has been challenged by other
   chachomim, a notorious example of which is R' Meir Kahane in his sefer
   "Or Haraayon".
   
   [Editor's Note: I'm still looking for more information to complete
   this item. A contribution of text to complete this would be welcome.
   Please send your suggestions to maintainer@scjfaq.org.]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.12: What other forms of Chasidism?

Answer:
   
   So far, the FAQ has mentioned Lubavitch, Breslov, and Satmar. However,
   there are lots of forms of Chasidism (and, alas, before the Shoah,
   there were even more). Some of the better known forms not discussed so
   far include: Amshinov, Alecsander, Belzer, Bobover, Bostoner, Boyaner,
   Ger (Gur), Karlin-Stoliner, Kloisenberger, Lalover, Modzitzer,
   Muncatz, Radziner, Skvirer, Slonimer, Tauscher, and Vizhnitzer. In
   Israel the Gerrer Hasidim are probably the most numerous, followed by
   the Belzers, Vizhnitzers, and Lubavichers. In addition, there are
   small sub-groupings like the Toldos Aharon haredim, who share many
   traditions with Satmar.
   
   Chasidism was founded by Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov, who lived in
   Poland and Ukraine in the early 1700's. He travelled from village to
   village, having different students in each. These students later
   founded schools... and over time, these various schools became the
   different forms that we see today. Each form is centered on the
   teachings of a particular Rebbe. The forms are usually named after the
   Rebee's town. The differences among the forms can be in worship style,
   customs, dress, philosophy, or political views.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.13: What are OCR (O-C-R) wars? Why all the flames?

Answer:
   
   These are disputes among Orthodox-Conservative-Reform Jews, perhaps
   the most regular and least productive discussion topic.
   
   Why is this? Perhaps it's a carryover from Talmudic study, in which
   decisions are reached by proposing a series of ideas, vigorously
   attacking them, and seeing which remain standing when the dust clears.
   Everyone is expected to be able to state his first principles and
   demonstrate how his practices are consistent with said principles.
   
   If the correctness of one of your practices is attacked, the best
   defense is to show that it is consistent with your principles, but not
   the attacker's. Once a debate boils down to different principles,
   there's nothing more to add, except to try to change each others'
   principles somehow.
   
   Another form of attack is to assert that another group's practices
   harm the Jewish people or Jewish survival. That group may well
   disagree with your assessment. If the different assessments are due to
   different principles, there's nothing more to add.
   
   Before jumping into the RCO pot, consider the following story, which
   was shared by David Kaufmann:
   
     Rabbi Manis Friedman, at a lecture to the women's organizations of
     a Reform synagogue and Chabad (co-sponsored by both), gave the
     following parable/analogy:
     
     The Jewish people are like children of a father gone on a long
     journey. They argue over what type of soup their father wants when
     he comes back - and are busy preparing the soup. "Father will want
     chicken soup, just like he did before." "No, Father wanted chickens
     soup then, now he'll want vegetable soup." When the father returns,
     what will matter is that the children cared most about what their
     father wanted and tried to have it ready for him.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.14: But Reform Judaism isn't Judaism? Why don't they see
         that?

Answer:
   
   One of the great temptations facing Orthodox (and some Conservative)
   Jews on SCJ is the opportunity for bashing the Reform movement.
   
   It is easy to understand the temptation; Non-Reform Jews clearly
   disagree with some very significant aspects of the Reform movement.
   They feel that doctrines of the Reform movement are wrong, and that
   many of their strategies (e.g., the best way to deal with such
   problems as intermarriage and non-observance) are ill-advised.
   Furthermore, because they have a strong sense of community with all
   Jews, Orthodox Jews are often pained by some aspects of the Reform
   movement.
   
   As tempting as Reform-bashing is, it should be avoided for several
   reasons.
   
   First, distressingly large number of R-bashing posts are simply "I
   hate Reform" statements without any further information or
   justification or rationale. They add little to any discussion.
   
   Second, far too many R-bashing posts are based on misinformation.
   Sometimes the R-bashing statements are absolutely contrary to
   O-halakha; how often have you read "R Jews are NOT Jews." In other
   instances, statements are posted such as "Reform rabbis are in favor
   of intermarriage" or "Reform rabbis co-officiate with non-Jewish
   clergy at interfaith weddings." The former is not true (although some
   Reform rabbis will officiate at intermarriages, they do not favor
   them), and the latter is rarely true. "There are no fourth-generation
   Reform Jews" or "Fourth-generation Reform Jews are all Unitarians" are
   both simply untrue. To learn the truth about Reform/Progressive
   Judaism, interested readers should look at the Reform/Progressive
   Section of the FAQ.
   
   Third, irrelevant and usually unsubstantiated arguments are often
   made. Whether there will be many or few Reform Jews in 50 years is
   heavily conjectural, rarely backed by data, and irrelevant to the
   question of the correctness of the Reform movement. Think: 50 years
   ago, who would have predicted the present apparent resurgence of
   Orthodoxy?
   
   Fourth, these rather crude forms of R-bashing do not simply reflect
   poorly on the poster; far more significantly (from an Orthodox
   perspective), they reflect poorly on Orthodoxy. Remember that there
   are many more lurkers than there are posters. One of the great
   tragedies of SCJ is that too many people will read some of the crude
   R-bashing messages and conclude that "If this is what Orthodoxy is all
   about, I want nothing of it."
   
   Finally (closely related to the fourth issue), R-bashing is a
   spectacularly poor way to present Orthodoxy to non-Orthodox readers.
   R-bashing gives the impression that the central feature of Orthodoxy
   is the rejection of Reform. In doing so, R-bashing blinds readers from
   seeing the beauty, the joy, the compassion, the love of Judaism and
   the sanctity that Orthodox Jews find in Orthodoxy.
   
   SCJ provides great temptations for R-bashing. But such R-bashing
   inevitably degenerates to a major hilul haShem, a desecration of G-d's
   name, because it inevitably offends non-Orthodox readers, and turns
   them off on Orthodoxy.
   
   SCJ also offers great opportunities for kiddush haShem, for the
   sanctification of G-d's name. Many SCJ readers have never before
   interacted with Orthodox Jews, and have heard only negative
   stereotypes (just as many O Jews have heard only stereotypes about
   non-O Jews).
   
   By providing thoughtful, caring, compassionate, considerate, answers,
   it is possible to show the positive side of Orthodoxy. By making
   reasoned and reasonable comments, others can be convinced that the
   Orthodox positions are reasoned and reasonable.
   
   There are, in fact, several SCJ readers whose increased levels of
   observance has been fostered by such posts in the past. And there are
   other SCJ readers who were once rabidly anti-Orthodox, and whose
   opposition has been somewhat softened by such posts. There is no
   evidence of non-observant SCJ readers whose level of observance has
   increased based on inflammatory R-bashing.
   
   Orthodox Jews should not gloss over OCR differences, or that accept
   the O-halakhic legitimacy of Reform practices. But Orthodox rejection
   of Reform practices must be presented with a rationale, must be
   justified, and must be polite. Orthodoxy rejects Reform practice
   because Orthodoxy believe they (the practices) are wrong, not because
   Reform Jews are terrible.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.15: But Orthodox Judaism isn't Judaism? Why don't they
         see that?

Answer:
   
   On the other hand, SCJ also provides a temptation for Reform Jews to
   bash Orthodoxy's traditional approach as outmoded and antique. Resist
   the temptation!
   
   Rabbi Walter Jacob said: "It is not our task as liberal Jews to
   complain about the Orthodox attitude or to be bullied by it, but
   rather to choose our legitimate path according to the inner logic and
   development of liberal Judaism". By arguing how Orthodoxy is wrong,
   you do no service to Reform. The best argument for Reform Judaism is
   to present a positive image of Reform as serious, but embracing of
   other forms of Judaism. It goes against Reform philosophy to claim
   that Orthodoxy is not a valid expression of Judaism.
   
   Just like Orthodox Jews, Reform Jews have a sense of community with
   all Jews. Yet, Reform Jews are often pained by some aspects of
   Orthodoxy.
   
   As tempting as Orthodox-bashing is, it should be avoided for several
   reasons.
   
   First, distressingly large number of O-bashing posts are simply "I
   hate Orthodoxy" or "I hate Orthodoxy's attitudes" statements without
   any further information or justification or rationale. They add little
   to any discussion.
   
   Second, far too many O-bashing posts are based on misinformation. For
   example, many discussions revolve around the O treatment of women.
   However, to the O, there is nothing wrong: there are different roles,
   and different roles have different obligations. The same is true for
   many other O practices. Try to view the practice against the
   traditional point of view; it is incorrect to judge it against the R
   point of view. You may choose to disagree with the practice, but that
   is your choice.
   
   Third, many of the arguments with Orthodoxy are calling for them to
   accept things that just cannot be accepted. Many Reform practices go
   against traditional beliefs; to accept them would require Orthodoxy to
   discard those beliefs. That's the wrong thing to ask. Focus on where
   Jews are similar, not where Jews are different.
   
   Fourth, these rather crude forms of O-bashing do not simply reflect
   poorly on the poster; far more significantly (from an Reform
   perspective), they reflect poorly on Reform. Remember that there are
   many more lurkers than there are posters. One of the great tragedies
   of SCJ is that too many people will read some of the crude O-bashing
   messages and conclude that "If this is what Reform is all about, I
   want nothing of it."
   
   Finally (closely related to the fourth issue), O-bashing is a
   spectacularly poor way to present Reform to non-Reform readers.
   O-bashing gives the impression that the central feature of Reform is
   the rejection of Orthodoxy. In doing so, O-bashing blinds readers from
   seeing the beauty, the joy, the compassion, the love of Judaism and
   the sanctity that Reform Jews find in Reform.
   
   SCJ provides great temptations for O-bashing. But such O-bashing
   inevitably degenerates to a major desecration of G-d's name, because
   it inevitably offends readers, and turns them off of Reform.
   
   SCJ also offers great opportunities for kiddush haShem, for the
   sanctification of G-d's name. Many SCJ readers have never before
   interacted with Reform Jews, and have heard only negative stereotypes
   (just as many R Jews have heard only stereotypes about non-R Jews).
   
   By providing thoughtful, caring, compassionate, considerate, answers,
   it is possible to show the positive side of Reform. By making reasoned
   and reasonable comments, others can be convinced that the Reform
   positions are reasoned and reasonable.
   
   Reform Jews should not gloss over OCR differences. However, the focus
   should be on where the practices are congruent, and differences must
   be presented with a rationale, must be justified, and must be polite.
   Reform has different practices because Reform interprets the
   underlying halacha differently, not because practices or beliefs are
   outmoded or silly.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.16: Why shouldn't I say "ultra-Orthodox", "Reformed
         Judaism", or "Humanist Judaism"?

Answer:
   
   Because such terms are inappropriate, and usually reflect a lack of
   knowledge about the group in question:

     * "Ultra-Orthodox". This term, when used properly, refers to the
       most carefully and detailed observant among the Orthodox, and who
       go to great lengths to keep away from most of Western culture. It
       arose as a reaction to the "Neologue" movement in 19th century
       Hungary, an extremely limp attempt at Reform (today they'd be
       called modern Orthodox, but such fine gradations didn't exist
       then).
       In practice, the term is usually used as a disparaging synonym for
       Orthodox or Chassidic. What passes for an unremarkable level of
       observance is inaccurately elevated into a form of "fanaticism".
       Many people outside the Orthodox community mistakenly identify
       those who wear Chassidic garb (long black coats, earlocks for men,
       wigs/kerchiefs for women) as "ultra-Orthodox." In fact, the
       Chassidic groups are no more or less observant than other Orthodox
       groups who do not dress so distinctively.
       The term "Chareidi" (literally: "trembling" as in "trembling in
       awe of HaKadosh Baruch Hu (the Holy One Praised by he).") tends to
       refer to the same people as described by "Ultra-Orthodox" but is
       more acceptable. It hasn't caught on in the U.S. yet.

     * "Reformed Judaism". The correct term for the Liberal/Progressive
       Branch of Judaism is "Reform Judaism", not "ReformED Judaism".
       "Reformed" implies that the adherents used to be Jews, but they
       learned and are now something else (e.g., early Christians were
       "Reformed" Jews). "Reform", on the other hand, indicates a belief
       in the ability to change (i.e., "Reform") the practices while
       still remaining Jews.

     * "Humanist Judaism". The correct term for Rabbi Sherwin Wine's
       movement is "Humanistic Judaism", not "Humanist Judaism".
       "Humanist", similar to "Buddhist", designates an adherent of a
       specific non-Jewish religion. "Humanistic Judaism" is a
       non-theistic branch of Judaism, based on a humanistic
       interpretation and application of Jewish traditions.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.17: How does a Chassid differ from Misnagid?

Answer:
   
   Chassidism comes in many forms. One distinguishing characteristic is
   an emphasis on the importance of a personal/ emotional/ ecstatic touch
   to the doing of the mitzvos. Another is the reliance on a Rebbe,
   especially for any important life decisions. A third characteristic is
   the telling of tales. Misnagdim will often have some of these
   characteristics, but the Chassidic approach elevates them to worthy
   goals in their own right.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.18: What is a "Torah Jew?"

Answer:
   
   The expression "the Torah world" and "Torah Jew" tends to be used
   primarily by the "yeshivish" world, as other groups prefer other
   buzzwords. But many other Jews object to the term, as they also claim
   to be true to Torah principles in their practice.
   
   In general, if someone dislikes a particular term, switch to another
   term which conveys the same information.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.19: What about homosexual Jews?

Answer:
   
   Traditional Judaism considers particular common homosexual sexual
   activities as an abomination. The more liberal movements (such as
   Reform) make no statements about the sexual acts, but do not feel that
   homosexuals should be discriminated against due to sexual orientation.
   Great debates have raged on S.C.J regarding the extent to which Jewish
   practices and congregational life should include homosexuals.
   
   Nevertheless, as with society as a whole, there are members of the
   Jewish community who are homosexual. A support page
   (<http://www.usc.edu/Library/oneigla/tb/>) has been established on the
   web for those individuals.
   
   For additional information, readers might want to consult the
   following links:

     * Orthodox Jewish responses to homosexuality:
       http://shamash.org/listarchives/mail-jewish/Special_Topics/Homosex
       uals

     * Essay by Rabbi Shmuley Boteach, Oxford, UK:
       http://www.shamash.org/listarchives/oxford-judaism/homosexuality

     * http://www.gayjews.org/. This is a web page and resource for
       Orthodox/Traditional Jews who are homosexual. It also maintains
       some resources from non-Orthodox rabbis, both official positions
       as well as personal position papers.
       
   Conservative Judaism has issued four separate teshuvot (responsa) on
   homosexuality, all of which were used as backing sources for a unified
   movement consensus position. The CJLS consensus position is that given
   the current state of scientific, psychological and biological
   information on the origin and nature of homosexuality, homosexual
   relationships nevertheless can not be judged to be in accord with
   halakha (Jewish law). Some of the responsa note that there are certain
   leninencies in the law and potential legal novellae which may be
   utilized, depending on new information which may be discovered.
   
   In particular:

     * The Conservative movement does not ordain homosexuals as rabbis or
       cantors, because these positions are considered to be the most
       important halakhic role models.

     * The Conservative movement does not approve of homosexual marriages
       or committment ceremonies.

     * The Conservative movement does allow homosexual men and women to
       otherwise participate fully in synagogue life and the Jewish
       community. It sees homosexuality as the non-fulfillment of one
       mitzvah - but there are 612 other mitzvot that are open to be
       fulfilled. Conservative Judaism affirms that homosexual men and
       women may lead prayers, have an aliyah to read from the Torah, and
       may even serve as youth group counselors or Hebrew school
       teachers.
       
   The specifics of the Conservative responsa may be seen at
   http://communities.msn.com/JudaismFAQs&naventryid=118.
   
   Reconstructionist Judaism has rejected the traditional view in all
   areas relating to this issue: they view all restrictions on
   homosexualiy as null and void. As such, they ordain homosexual Jews as
   rabbis and cantors. The Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association
   permits Jewish homosexual marriages and homosexual intermarriages.
   
   The American Reform movement has rejected the traditional view in all
   areas relating to this issue: they view all restrictions on
   homosexualiy as null and void. As such, they do not prohibit
   ordination of homosexual Jews as Rabbis and Cantors (although they
   don't really make a point of asking anything about sexual preference
   beforehand). With respect to same-sex union ceremonies, in 2000, the
   Central Conference of American Rabbis issued a resolution that says:
   
     WHEREAS justice and human dignity are cherished Jewish values, and
     
     WHEREAS, in March of 1999 the Women's Rabbinic Network passed a
     resolution urging the Central Conference of American Rabbis to
     bring the issue of honoring ceremonies between two Jews of the same
     gender to the floor of the convention plenum, and
     
     WHEREAS, the institutions of Reform Judaism have a long history of
     support for civil and equal rights for gays and lesbians, and
     
     WHEREAS, North American organizations of the Reform Movement have
     passed resolutions in support of civil marriage for gays and
     lesbians, therefore
     
     WE DO HEREBY RESOLVE, that the relationship of a Jewish, same
     gender couple is worthy of affirmation through appropriate Jewish
     ritual, and
     
     FURTHER RESOLVED, that we recognize the diversity of opinions
     within our ranks on this issue. We support the decision of those
     who choose to officiate at rituals of union for same-gender
     couples, and we support the decision of those who do not, and
     
     FURTHER RESOLVED, that we call upon the CCAR to support all
     colleagues in their choices in this matter, and
     
     FURTHER RESOLVED, that we also call upon the CCAR to develop both
     educational and liturgical resources in this area.
     
   Details on the history of this position may be found in Section 18.3.8
   of the Reform FAQ. You can search for the CCAR resolutions at
   http://www.ccarnet.org/reso/
   
   Progressive [Reform] Judaism in Israel does not permit homosexual
   marriages.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.20: Is it true that Jews are all (fill-in-the-blank)?
         rich? (or smart, or ...)

Answer:
   
   No. There are many poor Jews who need your support. Consider
   contributing to Jewish charities, and/or volunteering your time or
   services to them.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 2.21: How many Jews are there today in the U.S.A.?

Answer:
   
   A 1990 [yes, this appears to be the latest survey] National Jewish
   Population Survey of the Council of Jewish Federations (which can be
   found at the North American Jewish Data Bank
   (http://web.gc.cuny.edu/dept/cjstu/na.htm) reports the following:
American Jews:  (TOTAL......5,515,000)
     Born Jews, Consider Judaism their religion.....4,210,000
     Born Jews, Citing no religion..................1,120,000
     Jews by Choice (formerly gentiles)...............185,000

Reform.......................41.4%  "Traditional"*............... 3.2%
Conservative.................40.4%  Reconstructionist............ 1.6%
Orthodox..................... 6.8%  Miscellaneous "Jewish"*...... 1.4%
"Just Jewish"*............... 5.2%

*: self-description, though not a denomination.

   Survey Criteria for the classifications:
   
   Orthodox:
          Emphasizes the binding unchanging character of Jewish law
          
   Conservative:
          Asserts the continuing authority of Jewish law as part of a
          dynamic and developing tradition.
          
   Reform:
          Emphasizes the Jewish prophetic values and accepts Jewish
          practices that it considers relevant for modern times.
          
   Reconstructionism:
          A humanistic approach to Jewish tradition that redefines the
          idea of G-d in humanistic terms.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.26 07:17

End of S.C.J FAQ Part 2 (Who We Are) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:10 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yj-000OVuC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:09 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05605
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:24:15 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 5949F7A139
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:25 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 067997A114
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:24 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28101 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:35 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:35 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032535.28100.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 03-Torah-Halacha
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 110176
Lines: 2234

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Torah and Halachic Authority (3/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.3>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/03-Torah-Halacha
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Questions about Torah and Halachic Authority
Message-ID: <faq.3_970250821@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/03-Torah-Halacha
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.03-Torah-Halacha
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
                    Part 3: Torah and Halachic Authority
                    [Last Post: Fri Sep 29 11:07:14 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                 Section 3:
                                   Torah
                                      
    1. What is the Written Law?
    2. What are the books of the Jewish Bible (Tanakh)?
    3. Why, in the Tanakh, does G-d have so many Names?
    4. Who wrote the Torah?
    5. What is the Oral Law?
    6. How was the Oral and Written Law passed down to us?
    7. What is the Great Assembly (Anshe Knessest HaGedolah)?
    8. Who are the Zugot (pairs)?
    9. What is the Mishna?
   10. What is the relationship between the Mishna and the Torah?
   11. What are the Orders of the Mishna?
   12. What is the Tosefta?
   13. What is the relationship between the Tosefta and the Mishna?
   14. What is the Gemara and what is the Talmud?
   15. What is the Talmud?
   16. What is Talmud Yerushalmi?
   17. What is Talmud Bavli?
   18. What is Rashi's commentary on the Talmud?
   19. What is the Tosafot?
   20. Who wrote the Tosafot?
   21. What is the relationship of the Tosefta to the Talmuds?
   22. What are Baraitot?
   23. What are the extra-canonical (minor) tractates?
   24. What is a Midrash?
   25. What are Halakhic (or Tannaitic) Midrashim?
   26. What are the main Halakhic Midrashim?
   27. What are the main Exegetical Midrashim?
   28. What are the main Homiletic Midrashim?
   29. What are the Midrashim on the Five Megillot (aka The So-Called
       Rabbot)?
   30. What are some other important Haggadic works?
   31. What is the Sefer Yetzirah (The Book of Creation)?
   32. What is Sefer haBahir, The Bahir (The Book of Illumination)?
   33. What is The Zohar?
   34. What are the Major Codes of Jewish Law?
   35. What is the Rif (Hilkhot of Rav Alfassi)?
   36. What is the Mishneh Torah (Yad Ha-Hazaqah , Sefer Mehoqeq)?
   37. What is the Sefer Mitzvot Gadol (The Semag)?
   38. What is the Arba'ah Turim (The Tur , The Four Rows)?
   39. What is the Shulkhan Arukh?
   40. What is the Hamappah of Rabbi Moshe Isserles?
   41. What is the Kitzur Shulkhan Arukh?
   42. What is the Mishnah Berurah?
   43. What Other Codes of Jewish Law Are Used by Non-Orthodox Jewish
       Movements?

                                 Section 4:
                             Halachic Authority
                                      
    1. What is "Halacha"? How is it determined?
    2. Traditionally, what are the levels of halacha?
    3. Traditionally, what are the different rabbinic eras?
    4. How can differing halachic rulings all be considered valid?
    5. How does the Conservative movement deal with Halachic questions?
    6. What is the difference between two Orthodox rabbis who disagree
       and an Orthodox and a Reform who disagree?
    7. Who is RAMBAM that is mentioned and what are his 13 principles?
    8. Who was Rashi?
    9. Who was the Ramban?
   10. What is Kabbalah and how can I learn about it?
   11. Who is allowed to study Kabbalah?


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.1: What is the Written Law?

Answer:
   
   The Written Law consists of the books of the Hebrew Bible, the Tanakh.
   It should be noted that the term "Bible" is more commonly used by
   non-Jews, as are the terms "Old Testament" and "New Testament". The
   appropriate term for Jews to use for the Hebrew Bible is "Tanakh".
   Tanakh is an acronym for Torah, Nevi'im, and Ketuvim.
   
   The Torah is also known as the Chumash, Pentateuch, or Five Books of
   Moses. The word 'Torah' has the following meanings:
    1. A scroll made from kosher animal parchment, with the entire text
       of the Five Books of Moses written in it by a sofer [ritual
       scribe]. This is the most limited definition.
    2. More often, this term means the text of the Five Books of Moses,
       written in any format, whether Torah scroll, paper back book,
       CD-ROM, sky-writing or any other media.
       Any printed version of the Torah (with or without commentary) can
       be called a Chumash or Pentateuch. However, one never refers to a
       Torah Scroll as a Chumash!
    3. The term 'Torah' can mean the entire corpus of Jewish law! This
       includes the Written and the Oral Law, which includes the Mishna,
       the Midrash, the Talmud, and even later day legal commentaries.
       This definition of Torah is probably the most common among
       Orthodox Jews. Usually you can figure out which definition is
       being used by the context.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.2: What are the books of the Jewish Bible (Tanakh)?

Answer:
   
   Again, note that "Bible" is more commonly used by non-Jews, as are the
   terms "old testament" and "new testament", although "scripture" is a
   synonym used by both Jews and non-Jews. The appropriate term to use is
   Tanakh. This word is derived from the Hebrew letters of the three
   parts that make it up:
   
   Torah:
          Books of Genesis (B'reishis), Exodus (Sh'mos), Leviticus
          (Vayikra), Numbers(Bamidbar), and Deuteronomy (D'varim).
          
   N'viim (Prophets):
          Books of Joshua, Judges, I Samuel, II Samuel, I Kings, II
          Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah,
          Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habukkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah,
          and Malachi. (The last twelve are sometimes grouped together as
          "Trei Asar." ["Twelve"])
          
   K'Tuvim (Writings):
          Books of Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Song of Songs, Ruth,
          Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel (although not all
          that is included in the Christian Canon), Ezra and Nehemiah, I
          Chronicles, and II Chronicles.
          
   It should be noted that the breaking of Samuel (Shmuel), Kings
   (Melachim), and Chronicles (Divrei hayamim) into two parts is strictly
   an artifact of the Christian printers who first issued the books. They
   were too big to be issued as single volumes. Because every one
   followed these de facto standards, the titles of Volume 1 and Volume 2
   were attached to the names. The division of the Tanach into chapters
   was also done by medieval Christians, and only later adopted by Jews.
   
   Many Christian Bibles have expanded versions of several of these books
   (Esther, Ezra, Daniel, Jeremiah and Chronicles) including extra
   material that is not accepted as canonical in Judaism. This extra
   material was part of the ancient Greek translation of the Tanakh, but
   was never a part of the official Hebrew Tanakh. Jews regard this extra
   material as apocryphal. Among Christians, there is a difference of
   opinion. Catholics regard this material as canonical, while many
   Protestant sects regard this material as Apocrypha. What is and is not
   regarded as Apocrypha varies among the many Christian sects. Some of
   the most famous Apocryphal stories are closely associated with the
   book of Daniel, and indeed are printed as part of that book in some
   Christian Bibles. These stories include: Susan and the Elders, The
   Song of the Three Children, and Bel and the Dragon.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.3: Why, in the Tanakh, does G-d have so many Names?

Answer:
   
   Traditional Jews answer that each name represents a different aspect
   of G-d, similar (l'havdil) to the way the U.S. President is known as
   "President," "Commander-in-Chief," "Chief Executive," or "Mr.
   So-and-so" depending upon the role he's playing at the moment.
   
   ("L'havdil" denotes that the writer acknowledges a distinction between
   the sacred and the secular.)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.4: Who wrote the Torah?

Answer:
   
   Ah, yet another easy question. :-)
   
   The traditional view is that G-d gave the Jewish people the entire
   Torah; hence the Torah is the word of G-d. As described above, the
   Torah consists of a written and an oral portion (although much of the
   oral portion is now written down). Of the written portion:

     * The first five books (Pentateuch, Chumash) were dictated by G-d to
       Moses, while Moses was in a conscious and aware state.

     * N'viim (the Prophetic writings) were transmitted by G-d to the
       prophets by various means (such as by a dream or vision) and
       transcribed by the prophet in his (or her) own style and wording.
       G-d communicated with all prophets (except Moses) through dreams
       or visions. These writings are considered a level "below" that of
       Moses. Specific laws are not derived from the Prophets, except
       through examples of how a mitzvah was actually performed. There
       were many more prophets in the history of Israel than are recorded
       in the Neviim. See Section 12.11 "Who were the prophets?"

     * K'Tuvim (Sacred Writings) were the result of "Ruach HaKodesh"
       (roughly: "Divine Inspiration"), which is one level below
       "prophecy". Visions from the writings are more mystical and may be
       complete allegory. Unlike prophecy, they do not have to come true.
       The Rambam defines a number of different "levels" of prophecy
       (based on the method through which the prophet received the
       message and the clarity with which he/she received it) and points
       out that they do not have to function on the same level at all
       times. For example, many people include Daniel among the prophets
       while his book is in K'Tuvim. Other examples are King David and
       Tehillim or Jeremiah and Eichah (Lamentations).
       
   The Liberal movements hold less with the notion of the Torah being the
   actual word of G-d, and more with the notion of the Torah being of
   divine inspiration, written in the language and context of its time:

     * Conservative. The Conservative movement teaches that the Torah is
       not one long quote from God, but rather is a human document that
       was written in response God's revelation of himself to us at Mount
       Sinai. Within the Conservative movement are basically two schools
       of thought with regards to the content of Revelation:

          + Rabbi Solomon Schechter is a good example of the
            traditionalists, who explicitly taught that God not only
            revealed his existence, but God also presented Israel with
            specific ideas and commandments, although the form in which
            these were given is something beyond what language can
            describe. Whether or not 'words' were used to convey ideas is
            irrelevant: What is relevant is that meaning was conveyed.
            Thus, the text of our Torah is a record of a human response
            to the Divine commandments.

          + Rabbi Elliot Dorf is a good example of the modernists, who
            explicitly teach that God did not reveal specific ideas or
            commandments in any propositional form. Rather, God revealed
            his existence, but did not impart any propositional content
            to Moses or the later Prophets. Instead, the Torah is a
            literary document that was produced as a result of Israel's
            encounter with the Divine. Thus, any laws contained within it
            can only be considered as semi-Divine in origin, as they do
            not express God's will, but rather express our best attempt
            at understanding what God wants of us.

     * Reform. Reform Judaism uses the idea of progressive relevation.
       The Torah may be the product of divine inspiration, but it was
       written in the language and context of its time, and must be
       continually reinterpreted into today's language and context.

     * Reconstructionist. Reconstructionist Jews believe that the Torah
       was not inspired by God in any way and is more the folklore of the
       Jewish people, albeit a folklore that is of the greatest
       importance. However, they do claim that the traditional mitzvot in
       the Oral and Written law are more or less binding, but for reasons
       of cultural significance only. It should be noted that some of
       today's new Reconstructionist rabbis are publicly questioning this
       theology, and our adopting a more traditional stance, although
       this trend has not yet made any real inroads among its laity.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.5: What is the Oral Law?

Answer:
   
   The Torah makes it clear that it was being transmitted side by side
   with an oral tradition. Many terms and definitions used in the written
   law are totally undefined. Many fundamental concepts such as shekhita
   (slaughtering of animals in a kosher fashion), divorce and the rights
   of the firstborn are all assumed as common knowledge by text, and are
   not elaborated. The term "oral law" thus reflects the knowledge about
   how to fulfill the laws and regulations of Torah that was transmitted
   orally, from generation to generation. The Oral Law can be thought of
   as a body of jurisprudence and procedure that accompanies the statutes
   of the Written Law. It is believed to have been passed down from the
   time of Moses, restored after the first exile by Ezra and Nehemiah,
   and finally written down by the academies at Yavne and in the Galilee
   in the two generations following the destruction of the Second Temple
   in 70 CE. It consists of specific interpretations and elaborations of
   the Written Law, and some commentary on the principles by which the
   Written Law can be expounded.
   
   There are Jews called Karaites, recognized by the state of Israel as
   100% Jewish but heretical, who reject the Oral Law, as did the
   Sadducees of the time of the Second Temple. One objection to their
   `purism' is that they have been forced by practical necessity to
   develop interpretations and methods of textual analysis of their
   own---you simply cannot have law without jurisprudence. This being the
   case, most traditional Jews accept the authority of the Oral Law that
   has come down to us as (at the very least) the closest we can come to
   Torah from Mount Sinai.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.6: How was the Oral and Written Law passed down to us?

Answer:
   
   The traditional view is the the Written Law was given to Moses at
   Sinai, and has remained unchanged since that time. At the same time,
   according to the traditional view, the Oral Law was dictated but not
   written down, in order to provide clarifications of Torah. To some
   extent, this is necessarily the case; the Written Torah mentions some
   core laws (e.g., the identities of kosher and non-kosher species,
   shechita [slaughtering], the kinds of activities prohibited on
   Shabbat, how Yom Kippur is observed, how the shofar is blown, what
   t'fillin [phylacteries] are, what is a sukkah, marriage and divorce)
   only briefly, without any of the requisite details. In many such
   instances, the Oral Torah has special status, and is referred to as
   "halakha l'Moshe mi'Sinai" (literally, Law to Moses at Sinai), and has
   the same immutable status as the Written Torah itself. Another factor
   "forcing" the recognition of the Oral Torah was the need for the basic
   halakhic principles of the Written Torah to extend and adapt (within
   limits) to societal changes; cultural and social changes demanded
   halakhic decisions, and these halakhic decisions had to be transmitted
   across generations. Deut 17:8-9 tells the people to "go the the judge
   who shall be in those days;" the rabbinic tradition thus explicitly
   commands adherence to the Oral Torah and to rabbinic authority.
   
   We do not know much of the early history of the Oral Torah, but much
   of it (e.g., the basic structure of the Amidah liturgy, and the basic
   principles of halakhic exegesis) is ascribed to the Men of the Great
   Assembly (539-332 BCE, the era of the Second Temple and Persian rule).
   Subsequent development of the Oral Law took place in the era of the
   Zugot ("pairs" of scholars who served as spiritual and intellectual
   leaders of the Jewish community under political domination of the
   Greeks and Hasmoneans; it was in that period that the Sadducees, who
   substantially rejected the authority of the Oral Torah, arose. But the
   varieties of modern Judaism derive from the Talmud, in which the
   essential principles of rabbinic Judaism were more fully discussed and
   developed. If the Oral Torah was indeed given to the Jews at Sinai at
   the same time as the Written Torah, how does one explain the talmudic
   disputes? There are at least three possibilities, and they are not
   mutually exclusive. Perhaps the Oral Torah was transmitted
   inaccurately, and the task of the rabbis was to reconstruct it.
   Alternatively, the halakhic principles of the Oral Torah were used by
   the rabbis to derive new laws, and to apply old laws to novel
   situations. The third possibility is that the Oral Law gave the rabbis
   the right (perhaps the responsibility) to legislate.
   
   Non-traditional movements have different positions on the origin. Some
   hold with the "documentary theory", which has four authors. Some hold
   with divine inspiration. Others believe in divine inspiration, written
   in the language and context of its time. However, all agree that the
   Written and Oral Torah contain eternal truths that apply as well today
   as when the documents were committed to parchment, and that study of
   both is critical.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.7: What is the Great Assembly (Anshe Knessest HaGedolah)?

Answer:
   
   According to traditional Jewish historiography, this was an assembly
   of 120 rabbis that ruled in the period after the time of the prophets
   up to the time of the development of rabbinic Judaism in 70 CE. They
   bridge a period of about 2 centuries. The tradition teaches that they
   redacted the books of Ezekiel, the twelve minor prophets (The Trei
   Asar), and the books of Daniel and Esther. They also composed the
   Shemonah Esrah, the standing prayer (Amidah) of 18, later 19, prayers
   that is still recited by Jews today. They canonized the Tanakh (Hebrew
   Bible). Most importantly, they enacted a democratization of Jewish
   education, making the Torah the possession of all, instead of just the
   priestly class.
   
   Historically, the Great Assembly described in Nehemiah 8-10 was a
   public assembly of Jews who returned to Israel after the exile in
   Babylonia. In this gathering the leaders and people of Israel
   rededicated themselves to the Torah as their inheritance and code of
   law.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.8: Who are the Zugot (Pairs)?

Answer:
   
   After the relative calmness of the period of Persian rule, the Greek
   occupied Eretz Yisrael. For over a century the land was the
   battlefield for warring armies of the Ptolemies and Seleucids. As a
   result, the Jewish homeland was politically, economically, and
   spiritually torn apart. During these times, Jewish leadership was in
   the hands of the Zugot.
   
   The term 'Zugot' refers to the two heads of the Sanhedrin (Great
   Assembly). The Sanhedrin was the successor to the Great Assembly, and
   it functioned as the legislative body of the Jewish people. At the
   head of the Sanhedrin was the Nasi (President) and second to him was
   the Av Bet Din (Father of the Assembly). For a period of about two
   hundred years, these Zugot were the spiritual guides of Jewish life
   and the transmitters of the Oral Law. These Zugot were:

     * Yose ben Yoezer of Sereda, Yose ben Yohanan

     * Yehoshua ben Perahyah, Mattai (or Nittai) or Arbel

     * Yehudah ben Tabbai, Simeon ben Shetah

     * Shemayah, Abtalion

     * Hillel the Elder, Shammai

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.9: What is the Mishna?

Answer:
   
   The Hebrew verb 'shanah' literally means 'to repeat [what one was
   taught] and is used to mean 'to learn'. The term 'Mishna' basically
   means the entire body of Jewish religious law that was passed down and
   developed before 200 CE, when it was finally redacted by Rabbi Yehudah
   haNasi (Judah the Prince). He is usually simply referred to as
   'Rabbi'.
   
   Prior to the time of Rabbi, all Jewish Law was transmitted orally; It
   was expressly forbidden to write and publish the Oral Law, as any
   writing would be incomplete and subject to misinterpretation and
   abuse. However, after great debate, this restriction was lifted when
   it became apparent that it was the only way to insure that the law
   could be preserved. To prevent the material from being lost, Rabbi
   took up the redaction of the Mishna. He did not do this at his own
   discretion, but rather examined the tradition all the way back to the
   Great Assembly. Some of tractates preceded him; these he merely
   supplemented.
   
   During this time period (around 200 CE) the Mishna, as such, was never
   published. Instead the main study of Jewish law was conducted in
   memorized form, except for private letters and notes.
   
   The Mishna consists of six orders (sedarim). This explains the
   traditional name for the Talmud as 'Shas'. 'Shas' is simply an
   abbreviation of shishah sedarim, six orders'. Each of the six orders
   contains between 7 and 12 tractates, called 'masekhot'. Each masekhot
   is divided into smaller units called 'mishnayot'.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.10: What is the relationship between the Mishna and the
         Torah?

Answer:
   
   The Mishna contains the detailed instructions necessary for following
   the rules that were merely outlined in the Torah.
   
   Which is a subset of which? Consider that although the basic laws of
   Judaism were revealed/developed simultaneously, only the basic mitzvot
   (without instructions on how to fulfill them) were originally written
   down. Although the Mishna was written centuries later, they are both
   of equal stature. However, because the Mishna includes most the laws
   of the Torah--and presents additional information--one could say that
   for practical purposes the Torah is a subset of the Mishna. Note that
   the Mishna does not quite cover all the laws in the Torah. Omissions
   include the laws of Mezuzot and the Priestly benedictions.
   
   When one gets to the Talmud, one sees that the Mishna is a subset of
   the Talmud, as the Talmud includes practically all of the Mishna as
   well as additional information.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.11: What are the Orders of the Mishna?

Answer:
   
   The orders of the Mishna are as follows:
    1. First Order: Zeraim (Seeds). 11 tractates. This order deals with
       agricultural laws and prayers
    2. Second Order: Mo'ed (Festival Days). 12 tractates. This order
       pertains to the laws of the Sabbath and the Festivals.
    3. Third Order: Nashim (Women). 7 tractates. This order concerns
       marriage and divorce.
    4. Fourth Order: Neziqin (Damages). 10 tractates. This order deals
       with civil and criminal law.
    5. Fifth Order: Qodashim (Holy Things). 11 tractates. This order
       involves sacrificial rites, the Temple, and the dietary laws.
    6. Sixth order: Toharot (Purity). 12 tractates. This order pertains
       to ritual and the laws of ritual purity (including family purity.)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.12: What is the Tosefta?

Answer:
   
   The Mishna is basic compilation of the Oral Law, and was written down
   around 200 CE. However there is another compilation of Oral Law from
   that time period--the Tosefta. Rashi (in his commentary on BT
   Sanhedrin 33a) writes that the Mishna was redacted by Rabbi Judah
   Ha-Nasi in consultation with members of the Academy, while the Tosefta
   was edited by Rabbis Hiyya and Oshaiah on their own. This gave the
   Tosefta less authority than the Mishna; today, the Tosefta is treated
   a supplement to the Mishna.
   
   The word 'tosefta' means 'supplement'. The Tosefta is a Halakhic work
   which corresponds in structure almost exactly to the Mishna, with the
   same divisions for sedarim (orders) and masekhot (tractates). It is
   mainly written is Mishnaic Hebrew, with a few Aramaic sentences.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.13: What is the relationship between the Tosefta and the
         Mishna?

Answer:
   
   The Tosefta was written shortly after the Mishna was redacted, and
   seems to act as a supplement to it. It extensively quotes most of the
   Mishna. The Tosefta offers author's names for laws that are anonymous
   in the Mishna; It augments the Mishna with additional glosses and
   discussions.
   
   Additionally, it functions as a commentary on unquoted Mishnaic
   material; It offers additional haggadic and midrashic material, and it
   sometimes contradicts the Mishna in deciding Halakha, or in declaring
   in whose name a law was given.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.14: What is the Gemara and what is the Talmud?

Answer:
   
   The term 'gemara' means addition; The gemara is an addition to the
   Mishna. Interestingly, although there is only one Mishna, there are
   two gemaras, each developed by many rabbis over a few centuries. One
   gemara was developed in Israel, and is called the Yerushalmi; the
   other was developed in Babylonia, and is called the Bavli. You never
   find the gemara printed by itself. It is always printed along with the
   Mishna.
   
   When you have the Babylonian gemara and the Mishna printed together,
   it is called Talmud Bavli (The Babylonian Talmud).
   
   When you have the Israeli gemara and the Mishna printed together, it
   is called Talmud Yerushalmi (or the Jerusalem Talmud, or the
   Palestinian Talmud, or the Talmud of the Land of Israel.)
   
   Keep in mind that the gemaras do not stick closely to the text, but
   offer a huge amount of additional material which is only loosely
   connected to the Mishna. They supplement the Mishna with haggadic
   materials and biblical expositions, and are a source for history and
   legend.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.15: What is the Talmud?

Answer:
   The word 'talmud' literally means 'study'. The Talmud is sometimes
   referred to as the Shas. Shas is a shortened form of the term 'Shisha
   Sedarim (six orders), a reference to the six orders of the Mishna.
   There are two distinct works known as Talmud: the Yerushalmi
   (Jerusalem or Palestinian) Talmud, and the Bavli (Babylonian Talmud).
   However, the Babylonian Talmud has greater popularity and authority,
   so the generic term 'Talmud' almost always refers to the Babylonian
   Talmud. The generic 'gemara' thus refers to the gemara of the
   Babylonian Talmud. References to the Jerusalem Talmud are explicitly
   qualified.
   
   Traditionally, the Talmud is the supreme sourcebook of Law, as it
   takes the rules listed in the Torah and describes how to apply them to
   different circumstances. Although technically not a legal code (other
   works were created for that purpose), it is the ultimate source
   material that is used to decide all matters of Halakha (Jewish law).
   
   Traditional rabbis study the Talmud in depth; however, they use the
   actual Talmud very rarely, preferring to accept opinions in later law
   codes as binding. Study of Talmud for its own sake is considered a
   great mitzvah.
   
   Conservative rabbis also consider Halakha as binding, but do not
   always accept the most recent and stringent opinions in the latest law
   codes as absolutely binding; As such they use the Talmud in the same
   way that rabbis of past eras used to use it. This is theoretically
   still an option in the Orthodox community, but in practice is used
   very rarely.
   
   Reform and Reconstructionist Jews do not teach Talmud in their Hebrew
   schools, but do teach it in their rabbinical seminaries. This material
   is used as part of the research into the application of Torah law, but
   the research also includes study of the larger context of the time,
   and the parallels to other co-existant societies.
   
   A citation "Check the gemara, Yevamos 12b" means tractate Yevamos,
   folio 12, reverse side of the folio as per the organization of the
   Vilna edition of the Babylonian Talmud. Similarly, Chullin 5a would be
   the obverse side of the fifth folio of tractate Chullin. "Daf Yomi" is
   a program in which the participants study both sides of a folio of the
   Babylonian Talmud every day of the year. It takes about 7.5 years to
   complete the cycle.
   
   After the closing of the Talmud, there has been considerable further
   development of the Law in the areas of practical application, but
   always in a tone that reveres the stated views of the Talmudic rabbis
   as being on a higher plane than those of our modern scholars, who are
   free to interpret but not to contradict. A sharp distinction is always
   drawn between Torah Law (meaning law that derives directly from
   prohibitions in the Written or Oral Torah) and Rabbinic Law (meaning
   law that the Talmudic rabbis adopted as a `fence' to protect us from
   unwarily transgressing Torah Law), and different standards are used to
   judge cases of doubt in matters of Torah Law than of Rabbinic. Often,
   a false distinction is made by uninformed posters between `Torah'
   (meaning Written) Law and Oral Law---in traditional Judaism, the two
   stand together in distinction to Rabbinic Law. Example: the Written
   Law says `an eye for an eye'. The Oral Law says (and historical
   documents from the Second Temple era confirm) that this was _never_
   intended literally, but rather means `measured and just (monetary)
   compensation for damages inflicted'. The Rabbinic Law upholds this
   principle, but might still command a man to forego the monetary
   damages in certain cases so as not to even come close to transgressing
   some other Torah prohibition, such as exacting interest on a debt, or
   causing baseless hatred. The first two are Torah, the last is not. But
   all are binding on Jews worldwide. (Note: A still lower level of
   `law', called minhag, or `custom', is post-Talmudic and usually has
   force only within particular communities.)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.16: What is Talmud Yerushalmi (Jerusalem Talmud)?

Answer:
   
   The Talmud Yerushalmi, also known as the Jerusalem Talmud (JT), the
   Palestinian Talmud, Talmud Eretz Yisrael (Talmud of the Land of
   Israel) and Gemara de Eretz Yisrael, is the Mishna plus the Yerushalmi
   gemara. It is interesting to note that the JT that we have today is
   missing a huge amount of material. There is only commentary for the
   first four orders of the Mishna; The rest has been lost to history.
   The JT gemara is also missing for tractates Avot and Eduyot, parts of
   Toharot and other sections as well. Despite extensive scholarship, it
   still is unclear why this material was not included in the final
   redaction of the JT.
   
   Rabbi Yohanan bar Nappaha was the main redactor of the JT. It was
   redacted around 500 to 550 CE. Additionally, the name 'Jerusalem
   Talmud' is a misnomer; it was most likely written in Northern Israel,
   specifically Tiberias.
   
   In general, whenever the JT contradicts the Babylonian Talmud (BT),
   the law follows the BT. Only on matters where BT is silent or unclear
   does the authority of the JT prevail.
   
   The absence of numerous Mishna tractates and chapters, the numerous
   self contradictions, as well as other internal evidence, suggests that
   the JT was not in fact redacted in the proper sense of the word, but
   rather was a hasty collection of material. Many scholars believe that
   the reason for the ultimate acceptance of the BT rather than the JT
   had a lot to do with the power struggles between the two Jewish
   communities. Thus it can be argued that the poor preservation of the
   JT may be a result of its rejection rather than its cause.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.17: What is Talmud Bavli (Babylonian Talmud)?

Answer:
   
   The Talmud Bavli (BT) is the Mishna plus the Babylonian gemara. It is
   much more complete than the Talmud Yerushalmi (JT), and the redaction
   is much more careful and precise. Still, it is by no means complete.
   The gemara only exists for 37 out of the 63 tractates of the Mishna.
   Why did these tractates remain without gemara in the BT? The
   traditional answer is that the laws of Zeraim and Toharot (except
   Niddah) had no practical relevance:

     * The agricultural laws were tied only to the land of Israel. In the
       diaspora these laws simply were of no use.

     * The purity laws (except for family purity) were no longer
       applicable, because there was no longer a Temple and sacrificial
       system.
       
   One might think then that there would be no BT gemara on Qodashim...
   but there is. This is probably because the study of the sacrificial
   regulations is generally thought of as being on par with actually
   performing sacrifices.
   
   In the usual printed editions, the BT comprises the full Mishna, the
   37 gemaras, and the extra-canonical (minor) tractates. Typically, this
   comprises 5,894 pages, and is much more extensive than the JT.
   
   The overall character of BT is encyclopedic. Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz
   states:
   
     The Talmud is the repository of thousands of years of Jewish
     wisdom. And the Oral Law, which is as ancient and significant as
     the Written Law (Torah), finds expression therein. It is a
     conglomerate of law, legend, and philosophy, a blend of unique
     logic and shrewd pragmatism, of history and science, anecdote and
     humor.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.18: What is Rashi's Commentary on the Talmud?

Answer:
   
   Rabbi Solomon ben Isaac (or: Shlomo Yitzhaki) is known by the acronym
   "Rashi". Rashi lived from 1040 to 1105 in Troyes, France.
   
   [In the www.scjfaq.org version, there is a picture of a Talmud Page to
   Illustrate This] In the Talmud, Rashi's Commentary is always situated
   towards the middle of the opened book display; i.e. on the side of the
   page closest to the binding. The semi-cursive font in which the
   commentaries are printed is often referred to as "Rashi script." This
   does not mean that Rashi himself used such a script, only that the
   printers standardly employ it for commentaries. And Rashi's were the
   commentaries par excellence to both the Bible and the Talmud. Rashi's
   Commentary, which covers almost the whole of the Babylonian Talmud,
   has been printed in every version of the Talmud since the first
   Italian printings.
   
   Rashi's commentary provides a full and adequate explanation of the
   words, and of the logical structure of each Talmudic passage. Unlike
   some other commentaries, Rashi does not paraphrase or exclude any part
   of the text, but carefully elucidates the whole of the text. Rashi
   also exerted a decisive influence on establishing the correct text of
   the Talmud. He compared different manuscripts and determined the
   readings that should be preferred.
   
   Rashi's commentary does not exist for every tractate of the Babylonian
   Talmud, and a few of the printed commentaries attributed to him were
   composed by others. In some instances, the text indicates that Rashi
   died before completing the tractate, and that it was completed by a
   student. This is true of the tractate Makkot, the concluding portions
   of which were composed by his son-in-law Rabbi Judah ben Nathan. It is
   also true of tractate Bava Batra finished (in a much wordier and
   detailed style) by his grandson, Rabbi Samuel ben Meir (Rashbam), one
   of the prominent contributors to the Tosafot. It is probably a sign of
   the success of Rashi's achievement that no subsequent scholar, until
   Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz in the late 20th century, tried to compose
   another comprehensive explanatory commentary.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.19: What is the Tosafot?

Answer:
   
   The Tosafot are commentary on the Talmud by various Rabbis shortly
   after the time of Rashi; Many of these rabbis were descendants of
   Rashi himself.
   
   The word "Tosafot" translates as "additions" or "supplements." This
   means that their authors and editors saw their work as supplements to
   Rashi's basic commentary. Some have seen the Tosafot as an addition to
   the Talmud itself. It carries on the Talmud's own methods of
   dialectical argument and debate. The Tosafot are printed on the outer
   margin of the page; i.e., when looking at an opened book you will see
   the Tosafot in the columns closest to the edges of the pages, farthest
   from the binding. They appear in Rashi script, with the headings of
   each discussion in large square letters. The Tosafot that have been
   printed in the standard Talmud editions are merely an accidental
   selection from a vast literature that circulated in manuscript. Some
   of the other Tosafot compendia have been published as separate works.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.20: Who wrote the Tosafot?

Answer:
   
   The Tosafot were composed by many scholars in different schools
   throughout the 12th and 13th centuries. They probably originated as
   students' notes of the discussions that took place in the Talmudic
   academy [=Yeshivah]. As students moved from one yeshivah to another
   they would assemble personal lists of the Tosafot of their various
   teachers. Some of the most prominent contributors to the Tosafot were:
   
   Rabbi Jacob ben Meir (Rabbenu Tam). 1100 - 1171.
          Rashi's grandson, lived in the French town of Ramerupt.
          
   Rabbi Samuel ben Meir (The Rashbam). 1080 - 1158.
          A grandson of Rashi's and the brother of Rabbenu Tam. In
          addition to his contributions to the Tosafot, he composed a
          famous commentary to the Torah that is distinguished by its
          scholarly objectivity in restricting itself to the plain,
          contextual meaning of the text without imposing the traditional
          Rabbinic interpretations.
          
   Rabbi Isaac of Dampierre (The Ri). 
          A nephew of Rabbenu Tam and the Rashbam, he lived in France
          during the 12th century; One of the most prolific of the
          Tosafists.
          
   Rabbi Samson [ben Abraham] of Sens.
          He lived in France during the latter 12th and early 13th
          centuries, and eventually moved to Jerusalem. He was the most
          important disciple of Rabbi Isaac of Dampierre. In addition to
          his Tosafot he composed a commentary to the two orders of the
          Mishnah for which there is no Babylonian Talmud.
          
   Rabbi Meir [ben Barukh] of Rothenburg. 1225 - 1293.
          Rabbi Meir made important contributions to Jewish civil law,
          and his many students diligently collected his customs,
          responsa and rulings, often comparing them with the material in
          the important Spanish codes of Jewish law.
          
   Unlike the explanatory commentaries, such as Rashi's, the Tosafot do
   not attempt to provide a full elucidation of the Talmud text. Rather
   they focus on particular issues in the Talmud or in Rashi's commentary
   which they explore in depth. They often propose alternative readings
   or interpretations to the ones presented by Rashi.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.21: What is the relationship of the Tosefta to the
         Talmuds?

Answer:
   
   Both Talmud Bavli and Talmud Yerushalmi mostly ignore the Tosefta. The
   Babylonian and the Jerusalem gemaras to the Mishna usually proceed
   independently of material contained in the Tosefta.
   
   The only explicit quotation of the Tosefta in the Talmuds is in
   Masekhot Yoma, 70A. However, many baraitot (authoritative legal
   material that was not redacted as part of the Mishna) quoted in the
   gemara correspond very closely to teachings in the Tosefta, agreeing
   in substance but differing in wording.
   
   Many rabbis in the gemara discuss a problem that seems already to have
   been solved in the Tosefta. The question is, are they unfamiliar with
   the Tosefta, or was the Tosefta considered non-authoritative, or were
   they simply unable to recall the Tosefta?
   
   The complete Hebrew text of the Tosefta is appended to the backs of
   Hebrew versions of the Talmud. An English translation by Jacob Neusner
   is available. There are also translations of complete Tosefta chapters
   available in different scholarly works.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.22: What are Baraitot?

Answer:
   
   Any authoritative legal material that was not redacted as part of the
   Mishna is known as Baraitot. Often the Gemara (main part of the
   Talmud) will quote a legal source outside the Mishna; This is a
   quoting of a baraita. Everything in the Tosefta is Baraita by
   definition, although there is much material that is considered Baraita
   that is from outside the Tosefta. The word 'baraita' means 'external
   teaching'.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.23: What are the extra-canonical (minor) tractates?

Answer:
   
   At the end of the Order Neziqin of BT, one finds a number of minor
   tractates:
    1. Avot de Rabbi Nathan. This is found in two versions, one with 41
       chapters, another has 48.
    2. Soferim. There is a BT version of this, as well as a JT version.
    3. Eyvel Rabbati. This tractate about laws and customs pertaining to
       dying and mourning is sometimes euphemistically called 'Semakhot'
       (rejoicing) by Rashi and others.
    4. Kalah. Discusses engagement, marriage and sex.
    5. Derekh Eretz Rabbah. This phrase literally means 'The Ways of the
       World', but is taken to mean deportment, manners and behavior.
    6. Derekh Eretz Zutta. Addresses to scholars, it is a collection of
       maxims urging self examination and modesty.
    7. Pereq haShalom.
    8. Sefer Torah. Regulations about writing Torah scrolls.
    9. Mezuzah
   10. Tefillin
   11. Tzitzit
   12. Avadim. Slaves, or more accurately, indentured servants.
   13. Gerim. Converts to Judaism.
   14. Kutim. Samaritans.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.24: What is a Midrash?

Answer:
   
   Dr. Jacob Neusner explains that the word 'Midrash' is based on a
   Hebrew word meaning 'interpretation' or 'exegesis'. He shows that the
   term 'Midrash' has three main usages:
    1. The term 'Midrash' can refer to a particular way of reading and
       interpreting a biblical verse. Thus we may say that the ancient
       rabbis provided Midrash to Scripture. This does not mean that any
       interpretation of scripture is automatically true rabbinical
       Midrash. In fact, most of what people call 'Modern Midrash' has
       nothing to do with the classical modes of literary exegesis that
       guided the rabbis. Commentary and Midrash are two different
       things! In order to get a good idea of what classical rabbinic
       Midrash really is, one has to actually study it; No two or three
       sentence definition can accurately define the structure of
       Midrash.
    2. The term 'Midrash' can refer to a book - a compilation of
       Midrashic teachings. Thus one can say that "Genesis Rabbah" is a
       book that is a compilation of Midrash readings on the book of
       Genesis.
    3. The term 'Midrash' can refer to a particular verse and its
       interpretation. Thus one can say that "The Midrash on the verse
       Genesis 1:1 says that...[and some Midrashic interpretation of the
       verse would go here].
       
   Dr. Charles T. Davis (Appalachian Statue University, Philosophy and
   Religion Department, NC) has prepared a summary of the definition and
   features of Midrash, based on Rabbi Burton Visotzky's "Reading the
   Bible". This summary says that once a canon (i.e., approved scriptural
   text) is closed, the problem facing the community is the problem of
   "searching out" the canon. Midrash is a method of reading the Bible as
   an Eternal text, and is the result of applying a set of hermeneutical
   principles evolved by the community to guide one in reading the canon,
   in order to focus one's reading. The ultimate goal of midrash is to
   "search out" the fullness of what was spoken by the Divine Voice.
   
   In developing midrash, there are two schools of thought on how to
   handle the language of Torah. One is that the language is the language
   of human discourse, and is subject to the same redundancies and
   occasional verbiage that we all encounter in desultory conversation.
   The other view holds that since Scripture is the Word of G@d, no word
   is superfluous. Every repetition, every apparent mistake, every
   peculiar feature of arrangement or order has meaning.
   
   Midrash minimizes the authority of the wording of the text as
   communication, normal language. It places the focus on the reader and
   the personal struggle of the reader to reach an acceptable moral
   application of the text. While it is always governed by the wording of
   the text, it allows for the reader to project his or her inner
   struggle into the text. This allows for some very powerful and moving
   interpretations which, to the ordinary user of language, seem to have
   very little connection with the text. The great weakness of this
   method is that it always threatens to replace the text with an
   outpouring of personal reflection. At its best it requires the
   presence of mystical insight not given to all readers.
   
   Additional reading on Midrash may be found in the Midrash Reading
   List.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.25: What are Halakhic (or Tannaitic) Midrashim?

Answer:
   
   These are exegetical midrashim on the books of Exodus, Leviticus and
   Deuteronomy, primarily legal. They establish the Tanakh (Hebrew bible)
   as the source of Halakha.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.26: What are the main Halakhic Midrashim?

Answer:
   
   Mekhilta. The Mekhilta is an important commentary on Exodus. It is
   essential to note that there are two separate versions of this midrash
   collection. One is "Mekhilta de Rabbi Ishmael" and the other is
   "Mekhilta de Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai". The former is the one that most
   Jews use today, but the latter is the text that was used by many
   medieval Jewish authorities. While the latter (ben Yohai) text was
   popularly circulated in manuscript form from the 11th to 16th
   centuries, it was lost for all practical purposes until it was
   rediscovered and printed in the 19th century.

     * Mekhilta de Rabbi Ishmael. This is a halakhic commentary on
       Exodus, concentrating on the legal sections, from Exodus 12 to 35.
       It derives halakha from Biblical verses. This midrash collection
       was redacted into its final form around the 3rd or 4th century CE;
       its contents indicate that its sources are some of the oldest
       midrashim, dating back possibly to the time of Rabbi Akiva. The
       midrash on Exodus that was known to the Amoraim is not the same as
       our current mekhilta; their version was only the core of what
       later grew into the present form.

     * Mekhilta de Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai. Based on the same core
       material as Mekhlita de Rabbi Ishmael, it followed a second route
       of commentary and editing, and eventually emerged as a distinct
       work. The Mekhlita de Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai is an exegetical
       midrash on Exodus 3 to 35, and is very roughly dated to near the
       4th century CE.
       
   Sifra. A comprehensive halakhic commentary on Vayikra (Leviticus),
   which works through all of Leviticus verse by verse. References in the
   Talmud to the Sifra are ambiguous; It is uncertain whether the texts
   mentioned in the Talmud are to an earlier version of our Sifra, or to
   the sources that the Sifra also drew upon. However, we do know that
   the references to the Sifra from the time of the Geonim and after are
   to the text that is extant today. The core of this text developed in
   the mid-3rd century as a critique and commentary of the Mishnah,
   although subsequent additions and editing went on for some time
   afterwards.

     * Sifre Numbers. A mainly halakhic midrash on Bamidbar (Numbers). It
       also includes a long haggadic piece in sections 78-106. References
       in the Talmud, and in the later Geonic literature, indicate that
       the original core of Sifre was on Numbers, Exodus and Deuteronomy.
       However, transmission of the text was imperfect, and by the middle
       ages, only the commentary on Numbers and Deuteronomy remained. The
       core material was redacted around the middle of the 3rd century.

     * Sifre Zutta (The small Sifre). A Halakhic commentary on Bamidbar
       (Numbers). The text of this midrash is only partially preserved in
       medieval works, while other portions were discovered by Solomon
       Schecter in his research in the famed Cairo Geniza. It seems to be
       older than most other midrash, coming from the early 3rd century.
       Terminology alert: Maimonides refers to this work as Mekhlita (de
       rabbi Ishamel) in his Sefer Ha'Mitzvot.

     * Sifre Deuteronomy. An exegetical and halakhic midrash on
       Deuteronomy. Redacted near the late 3rd century.
       
   Midrash Tannaim (also known as Mekhilta on Deuteronomy). This was a
   Halakhic midrash on Deuteronomy, of which only fragments exist today.
   Only portions of it can be reconstructed from quotes in other extant
   works, including Genizah fragments.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.27: What are the main Exegetical Midrashim?

Answer:

     * Genesis Rabbah (Bereshit Rabbah). A midrash on Genesis, it offers
       explanations of words and sentences and haggadic interpretations
       and expositions, many of which are only loosely tied to the text.
       It is often interlaced with maxims and parables. Its redactor drew
       upon earlier rabbinic sources, including the Mishna, Tosefta, the
       halakhic midrashim the Targums. Genesis Rabbah also apparently
       drew upon a version of Talmud Yerushalmi that resembles, yet was
       not identical to, the text that survived to present times. It was
       redacted sometime in the early 5th century.

     * Lamentations Rabbah (Eichah Rabbah). An exegetical midrash on
       Eichah (Lamentations). It contains verse by verse expositions,
       simple lexical explanations and also many parables and stories. It
       contains many stories about the destruction of the Temple, the
       crises under Trajan and Hadrian, and the Bar Kokhba revolt. It
       draws upon the Mishna, Tosefta, Mekhilta, Sifra and Sifre.
       Lamentations Rabbah has been transmitted in two versions. One
       edition is represented by the 1st printed edition, 1519 Pesaro;
       the other is the Buber edition, based on manuscript J.I.4 from the
       Biblioteca Casanata in Rome. This latter version (i.e. Buber) is
       quoted by the Shulkhan Aurkh, as well as medieval Jewish
       authorities. It was probably redacted sometime in the 5th century.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.28: What are the main Homiletic Midrashim?

Answer:
   
   Leviticus Rabbah (Vayikra Rabbah)
          This consists of 36 homilies on Leviticus, and was redacted
          sometime between 400 and 500 CE.
          
   Pesiqta de Rab Kahana (Verses of Rabbi Kahana)
          For a long time this work was only known by separate
          quotations, although recent scholarship has reconstructed the
          content and structure by piecing together more recently
          discovered manuscripts and fragments from the Cairo Genizah.
          This book is a homiletic midrash for the readings on the
          festivals and Sabbaths. The material contained within it was
          probably written between 500 and 700 CE.
          
   Pesiqta Rabbata 
          A collection of sermons for the festivals and Sabbaths. It may
          have been written sometime in the 6th or 7th century, but a
          more accurate dating still is impossible.
          
   Tankhuma (Yelamdenu)
          A homiletic midrash on the whole Torah. It probably was
          redacted around 400 CE.
          
   Devarim (Deuteronomy) Rabbah
          Consists of 27 self contained homilies that relate to
          Deuteronomy. Its core material was written before 400 CE, but
          later material was added until its redaction around 800 CE.
          
   Shmot (Exodus) Rabbah 
          The first part is an exegetical midrash on Exodus, while the
          second part is a homiletic midrash. It was redacted sometime
          before the 12th century, although it contains much older
          material.
          
   Bamidbar (Numbers) Rabbah 
          A haggadic and homiletic midrash on Numbers. Although its final
          form was reached around the 12th century, most of the material
          is probably from the 8th century.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.29: What are the Midrashim on the Five Megillot (aka The
         So-Called Rabbot)?

Answer:
   
   Lamentations Rabbah 
          As noted in Section 3.27, Lamentations Rabbah is exegetical
          midrash on Eichah (Lamentations). It contains verse by verse
          expositions, simple lexical explanations and also many parables
          and stories. It contains many stories about the destruction of
          the Temple, the crises under Trajan and Hadrian, and the Bar
          Kokhba revolt. It draws upon the Mishna, Tosefta, Mekhilta,
          Sifra and Sifre.
          
   Midrash Shir haShirim (Song of Songs Rabbah) 
          An allegorical interpretation of 'Song of Songs'. Written
          sometime between the 3rd and 6th century.
          
   Midrash Ruth 
          Exposition of the book of Ruth, redacted around 500.
          
   Midrash Kohelet (Ecclesiastes Rabbah) 
          An exposition of the book of Ecclesiastes, written in the 8th
          century.
          
   Midrash Ester (Haggadat Megillah) 
          An exposition of the book of Ester, written around 500 CE.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.30: What are some other important Haggadic works?

Answer:
   
   Megillat Ta'anit 
          A list from the time of the Second Temple describing 36 days on
          which fasting is not permitted because of the joyous events
          that occurred on those days. The main text is from the 1st
          century, while the commentary is post-Talmudic.
          
   Seder Olam Rabbah (Seder Olam) 
          Traditionally written by Tannaitic Rabbi Yose ben Halafta. It
          covers topics from the Creation to the construction of the
          Second Temple.
          
   Seder Olam Zutta 
          This book draws up a list of 89 generations from Abraham to the
          exile, and then to the Talmudic period. Not written before the
          8th century.
          
   Pirkei de Rabbi Eliezer (Baraita de Rabbi Eliezer) 
          Contains 54 chapters on the life of Rabbi Eliezer, and most of
          the Torah. It is nor a midrash in the real sense of the word,
          but is more a coherent biblical story. Dates from the 8th
          century.
          
   Josippon 
          A history of the Jews from the fall of Babylonia to the
          destruction of the Second Temple. Written in 953 CE by an
          anonymous author in Southern Italy, based on many historical
          records, but mainly the works of the Roman Jew, Josephus.
          
   Sefer haYashar (Toldot Adam) 
          "The Book of The Upright" presents a view of history from Adam
          and Eve to the Exodus from Egypt. Written sometime between the
          12th and 16th centuries.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.31: What is the Sefer Yetzirah (The Book of Creation)?

Answer:
   
   The best translation and commentary on this is by Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan.
   "Sefer Yetzirah", published by Jacob Aronson. It includes the complete
   Hebrew text of all versions of this book, a clear commentary with
   generous commentary and explanation, and in depth discussions of many
   areas of Kabbalah with clear and lucid explanations and diagrams. From
   the introduction:
   
     The Sefer Yetzirah is without question the oldest and most
     mysterious of all Kabbalistic texts. The first commentaries on this
     book were written in the 10th century, and the text itself is
     quoted as early as the sixth century. So ancient is this book that
     its origins are no longer accessible to historians.
     
     Careful study indicates that it is a meditative text with magical
     overtones. Talmudic traditions indicate that it could be used to
     create living creatures, including the Golem! The Sefer Yetzirah is
     a small and concise book, only 1300 words long in the short version
     and 2500 words long in the long version. The first chapter
     discusses the Sefirot; The second chapter is a discussion of the
     letters of the Hebrew alphabet, and the 231 gates; Chapters three
     to five discuss the divisions of the letters in relation to
     astrology.
     
     The text was deliberately written in a fashion so that it would be
     meaningless to those who read it without an extensive background in
     the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible) and Midrash. To guide the novice, Rabbi
     Kaplan takes great care to introduce the necessary knowledge to the
     reader, making it accessible for the very first time to English
     speakers without a Kabbalistic background.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.32: What is Sefer haBahir, The Bahir (The Book of
         Illumination)?

Answer:
   
   The Bahir is one of the oldest and most important of all Kabbalistic
   texts. Until the publication of the Zohar, the Bahir was the most
   influential source of Kabbalistic teachings. It is quoted in virtually
   every major Kabbalistic work and is cited numerous times by the Ramban
   in his commentary on the Torah. It is also paraphrased and quoted many
   times in the Zohar.
   
   The name 'Bahir' literally means 'brilliant' or 'Illumination', and is
   derived from the first verse quoted in the text of the Bahir "And now
   they do not see the light, it is brilliant [bahir] in the skies",
   which itself is a quote from the book of Job (37:21).
   
   This book is also called "The Midrash of Rabbi Nehuniah ben haKana".
   Although the Bahir is a fairly small book, 12,000 words in all, it was
   very highly esteemed. It was first published in Provence in 1176. Most
   Kabbalists ascribe authorship to Rabbi Nehuniah ben haKana, a Talmudic
   sage of the first century.
   
   One of the most important concepts revealed in it is that of the ten
   Sefirot. Also discussed are the opening verses of Genesis and their
   true meaning; The mystical aspects of the Hebrew alphabet; A
   discussion of Gilgul [reincarnation]; The 32 paths of Wisdom, and the
   Tzimtum, among other topics.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.33: What is The Zohar?

Answer:
   
   The Zohar [radiance] is the greatest classic of Jewish mysticism. It
   is a mystical commentary on the Torah, written in Aramaic, and is
   purported to be the teachings of the 2nd century Palestinian Rabbi
   Shimon ben Yohai. Legend relates that during a time of Roman
   persecution, Rabbi Shimon hid in a cave for 13 years, studying Torah
   with his son; During this time he is said to have been inspired by G@d
   to write the Zohar. However, there is no real mention of this book in
   any Jewish literature until the 13th century.
   
   In the 13th century, a Spanish Jew by the name of Moshe de Leon
   claimed to discover the text of the Zohar, and the text was
   subsequently published and distributed throughout the Jewish world.
   
   However, there is a school of thought (based on the writings of
   historian Gershom Scholem) that de Leon himself was the most likely
   author of the Zohar. Among other things, Scholem noticed the Zohar's
   frequent errors in Aramaic grammar and its highly suspicious traces of
   Spanish words and sentence patterns. This is still highly disputed by
   most (but not all) Orthodox Jews.
   
   Whoever the author is, the content of the book is not fraudulent. It
   definitely is based on older works, and it was a common practice to
   ascribe the authorship of a document to an ancient rabbi in order to
   give the document more weight.
   
   The Zohar contains and elaborates upon much of the material found in
   'Sefer Yetzirah' and 'Sefer Bahir', and without question is the
   Kabbalistic work par excellance.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.34: What are the Major Codes of Jewish Law?

Answer:

     * The Rif (Hilkhot of Rav Alfassi). Author: Yitchak Alfassi

     * Mishneh Torah (Yad Ha-Hazaqah). Author: Maimonides

     * Sefer Mitzvot Gadol. Author: Moses ben Jacob

     * Arba'ah Turim (The Tur). Author: Jacob ben Asher

     * Shulkhan Arukh. Author: Joseph Karo

     * Kitzur Shulkhan Arukh. Author: Shlomo Ganzfried

     * Mishnah Berurah. Author: R'Israel Meir Kagan

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.35: What is the Rif (Hilchos of Rav Alfassi)?

Answer:
   
   R. Yitchak Alfassi lived from 1013 to 1103. Early on he established a
   yeshiva in Fez, Morocco, but was forced to flee to Spain in 1088, and
   eventually established a yeshiva in Lucena that became the primary
   Torah center for Spain.
   
   His major work, entitled Hilchos of Rav Alfassi, is more commonly
   referred to as the Rif, and is a summation of all the halakhic
   material in the Talmud. The Rif only quotes that portion of Talmudic
   dialogue that is pertinent today, omitting all halachot that are no
   longer relevant after the destruction of the Second Temple, such as
   the sacrificial service.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.36: What is the Mishneh Torah (Yad Ha-Hazaqah , Sefer
         Mehoqeq)?

Answer:
   
   Moses Maimonides (Rabbi Moshe ben Maimon, usually referred to in
   Hebrew by the acronym "Rambam") was one of the towering figures in
   medieval intellectual and religious life. In addition to his law code,
   he excelled in the fields of philosophy, science, medicine, exegesis
   and communal leadership. Though born in Spain, in his youth his family
   fled religious persecution, settling in Egypt. Maimonides' literary
   output includes: a work on philosophical logic; an Arabic commentary
   to the Mishnah; an enumeration of the 613 precepts of the Torah; the
   Mishneh Torah law code; the Arabic philosophical treatise The Guide of
   the Perplexed; and many letters and responsa addressed to various
   Jewish communities.
   
   Maimonides lived from 1138 to 1204. He spent ten full years compiling
   the Mishneh Torah, which he continued to revise throughout his
   lifetime. The term "Mishneh Torah" means "The Second Law" and is the
   name used in the Bible itself to designate the book of Deuteronomy,
   which is a kind summary or review of the rest of the Torah.
   Maimonides's Mishneh Torah was intended to be a summary of the entire
   body of Jewish religious law.
   
   The Mishneh Torah is sometimes referred to as the Yad Ha-Hazaqah, "the
   mighty arm." This is a play on the numerological value of the Hebrew
   word for arm, "yad," which is 14, equal to the number of volumes in
   this code. Maimonides actually referred to the book as "Sefer Mehoqeq"
   ("The Book of Legislation"), a title which is rarely employed.
   
   The Mishneh Torah is composed in Rabbinic Hebrew, after the style of
   the Mishnah. It is divided up into fourteen general sections (similar
   to the "orders" of the Mishnah), each of which is further subdivided
   into books (like tractates), and then into numbered chapters and laws.
   Some of the distinctive features of the Mishneh Torah are the
   following:

     * It encompasses the full range of Jewish law, as formulated for all
       ages and places. Most other Jewish law codes confined themselves
       to laws that were in force in their own times and lands, thereby
       excluding rules that apply only in the Land of Israel, under an
       independent Jewish kingdom, or that could not be observed
       following the destruction of the Temple.

     * It completely reorganizes and reformulates the laws in a clear and
       logical system. Earlier codes had followed the Talmud's sometimes
       haphazard arrangement with only very few attempts to improve on
       that order.

     * It presents the normative rulings without any discussion or
       explanation of how the decisions were reached.

     * It contains a section on systematic philosophical theology,
       derived largely from Aristotelian science and metaphysics, which
       it regards as the most important component of Jewish law. Most
       other Jewish codes avoided mixing creed and religious law; and
       Maimonides' interpretation of Jewish religion in terms of Greek
       ideas aroused much opposition.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.37: What is the Sefer Mitzvot Gadol (The Semag)?

Answer:
   
   This title translates as "The Great Book of Commandments" and was
   written by Rabbi Moses ben Jacob of Coucy'. Rabbi ben Jacob lived in
   the first half of the 13th century, Coucy, France.
   
   This work--usually designated by its acronym, the Semag--classifies
   Jewish law according to the traditional enumeration of 613
   commandments. The work is divided into two sections. The first deals
   with the 365 negative precepts of the Torah, and the second with the
   248 positive precepts. References to the Semag are by Section
   (Positive or Negative) and Commandment Number within each section.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.38: What is the Arba'ah Turim (The Tur, The Four Rows)?

Answer:
   
   The Arba'ah Turim was written by Rabbi Jacob ben Asher. He is also
   sometimes known as The Tur (after the title of his most famous work)
   or as "Ba'al Ha'Turim [Master of the Turim]. He lived from 1270 to
   1343, in Toledo, Spain.
   
   The Tur followed Maimonides's precedent in arranging his work in a
   topical order. However, unlike Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, the Arba'ah
   Turim covers only those areas of Jewish religious law that were in
   force in the author's time. Rabbi Jacob did not deal with criminal
   law, let alone with the sacrifices or the Zera'im (agricultural
   precepts that could be observed only in the Holy Land.) The code is
   divided into four main topics, each of which is divided into a
   sequence of numbered paragraphs. The four "rows" are:
    1. Orah Hayyim - "The Path of Life". This section deals with worship
       and ritual observance in the home and synagogue, through the
       course of the day, the weekly sabbath and the festival cycle.
    2. Yoreh De'ah - "Teach Knowledge". This section deals with assorted
       ritual prohibitions, especially dietary laws and regulations
       concerning menstrual impurity.
    3. Even Ha-'Ezer - "The Rock of the Helpmate". This section deals
       with marriage, divorce and other issues in family law.
    4. Hoshen Mishpat - "The Breastplate of Judgment". This section deals
       with the administration and adjudication of civil law.
       
   Another departure from Maimonides' precedent was the fact that the Tur
   did not limit itself to recording the normative positions, but
   compared the various opinions on any disputed point. The influence of
   the Arba'ah Turim is thus perceptible in its integration of the
   Franco-German and Spanish legal traditions, as well as in its fourfold
   structure, which was later adopted by Rabbi Joseph Caro's Shulkhan
   Arukh, and remains the most widely used structure for the organization
   of law codes and responsa.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.39: What is the Shulkhan Arukh?

Answer:
   
   Rabbi Yosef Karo (1488 - 1575) made his greatest contribution to
   Jewish law by spending twenty years compiling an enormous halakhic
   work, the Beit Yosef. The Beit Yosef is a huge commentary on the Tur
   in which he clarifies the opinions of authorities who lived after the
   time of Rabbi Yaakov.
   
   However, a work was needed that would let a student determine Jewish
   law without having to wade through all of the voluminous and complex
   literature of the Talmud, the law codes and their commentaries.
   
   Rabbi Karo set out to solve this problem, and finally wrote The
   Shulkhan Arukh (literally, The Set Table) as a concise collection of
   the law brought in his larger work, the Beis Yosef. In writing the
   Shulkhan Arukh, Rabbi Yosef followed the chapter divisions of the Tur,
   although he innovated by breaking each section up into separate
   paragraphs for each law.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.40: What is the Hamappah of Rabbi Moshe Isserles?

Answer:
   
   Rabbi Moshe Isserles, also known as the Rama, lived in Cracow from
   1525 to 1572. He noted that the Shulkhan Arukh was based almost
   entirely on Sephardic tradition, and thus set out to create a series
   of glosses to be appended to the text of the Shulkhan Arukh for all
   instances where Sephardi and Ashkenazi customs differed.
   
   The short comments of the Rama are incorporated into the body of the
   Shulkhan Arukh and are printed in Rashi script. He referred to his
   comments as a 'mappah', which means tablecloth [for the set table].

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.41: What is the Kitzur Shulkhan Arukh?

Answer:
   
   This is a short, concise digest of halachah compiled by Rabbi Shlomo
   Ganzfried (Hungary 1804 to 1886). He intended his work for mostly
   uneducated laymen, and therefore did not cite sources for his rulings
   nor did he include any laws that were not useful in the daily life of
   the average Jew. This book became immensely popular after its
   publication due to its simplicity. This work is not binding in the
   same way as the Mishneh Torah or the Shulkhan Arukh. Note that in
   Israel in most religious public schools, Bnei Akiva Yeshivot and
   Ulpanot they have ceased to use the Kitzur and are using the Kitzur
   Makor Chaim by Rabbi Haim David Halevy. Rabbi HaLevy was born around
   1926, and is the Chief Rabbi of Tel-Aviv Yaffo. His works include:

     * Beyn Yisrael La'Amim. Between Israel and the nations

     * Dat U'Medina. Religion and Statehood

     * Mafteychot HaZohar Ve'ra'ayonotav. Indexes to the Zohar and its
       ideas.

     * Makor Hayim (Fountain of Life) (5 vol.). The books contain both
       the Halachot from Orach Haim plus an introduction to each chapter
       that contains the joint Halach/Agadah roots: Agadah, Mussar,
       Mahshavah etc., of each halacha.

     * Assey L'cha Rav (9 parts). A collection of responsa that includes
       modern questions such as Life after Death, Meditation, Martial
       Arts, and other questions and answers. All answers are presented
       clearly and the answers are intended for experts and layman alike.
       Both Sephardi and Ashkenazi sides of the issues are presented.

     * Kizur Shulchan Aruch. Similar to the Ginzberg kizzur except that
       it contains both Sephardi and Ashkenazi minhag where relevant.

     * Makor Chaim L'bat Yisrael. A concise edition of the halachot
       relevant especially to women. Includes an introduction to each
       chapter that gives the joint Halacha/Agada (see above) roots.
       Brings both Sephardi and Ahskenazi minhag where relevant.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.42: What is the Mishnah Berurah?

Answer:
   
   This is a commentary on the Shulkhan Arukh by Rabbi Israel Meir Kagan,
   better known as The Chofetz Chaim. (Poland, 1838 to 1933). Although he
   never held a formal position as a rabbi, hundreds of students flocked
   to his home in Radin. Eventually a yeshiva was established that Rabbi
   Meir supported. The Mishnah Berurah has become the authoritative
   halakhic guide for some segments of Ashkenazic Jewry. However, it is
   not accepted as an authoritative code by other segments, including
   many Chassidim and some Litvaks.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 3.43: What Other Codes of Jewish Law Are Used by Non-
         Orthodox Jewish Movements?

Answer:
   
   Conservative Judaism
   
   The current guide to Jewish Law as understood by the Conservative
   movement was written by Rabbi Isaac Klein in the 1970s. His "Guide to
   Jewish Law" is a comprehensive guide book to the Conservative
   understanding of Jewish law based upon the previous law codes,
   including the Mishneh Torah, The Tur, The Shulkhan Arukh, and the
   Mishneh Berurah. The book also includes the decisions of the
   Conservative movement's Rabbinical Assembly and the Committee on
   Jewish Laws and Standards. The goal of Rabbi Klein's work was to
   reflect the collective understanding of Halakha by the Conservative
   movement.
   
   Reform: 
   
   Although not a formal guide to Jewish Law, the Central Conference of
   American Rabbis has published "Gates of Mitzvah" and "Gates of the
   Seasons" as guidance on mitzvot that are critical to the life of a
   Reform Jew. More information may be found in the Reform Reading List.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.1: What is "Halacha?" How is it determined?

Answer:
   
   Halacha means "Way" or "Path". Halacha is the application of the Law
   (Torah) to everyday living.
   
   The traditional viewpoint is that Halacha should be decided by those
   who are most knowledgable in all aspects of Jewish law. Since the
   Halacha of each generation is decided by its greatest Torah scholars,
   and the Torah doesn't change, there is usually little change in the
   Halacha from one generation to the next. The development of Halacha is
   most evident when new situations arise for which rulings must be made,
   such as the destruction of the Temple, the development of electricity,
   and the increasing complexity of modern food processing technology.
   
   Since the non-traditional viewpoint is that the the Torah itself was
   written by people, both the interpretation of the Law and its
   application are re-evaluated in each generation, using the
   interpretations of the past to serve primarily as non-binding guidance
   in how to continue this process.
   
   Both viewpoints encourages all Jews to study halacha, and apply it to
   their daily lives in order that they be brought closer to G-d.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.2: Traditionally, what are the levels of halacha?

Answer:
    1. Minhag. Custom. Custom, although not really part of Halachah, can
       change. Minhag is any act that the masses, on their own, accept.
       Any minhag that is against actual Halachah, is called a minhag
       ta'os, a mistaken minhag. Any that is based on a misunderstanding
       is a minhag shtus, a foolish custom. These two should not be
       followed. Any nearly universal minhag is called a Minhag Yisroel,
       and has most of the stringencies of law. (Yarmulka, and Ma'ariv
       services are two examples of a Minhag Yisroel.)
    2. Din dirabanan. A rabbinic law. These are set up by the rabbinate,
       instead of the masses, in order to preserve the spirit of the law.
       For example, Purim and Chanukah. There are 7 new commandments that
       are entirely rabbinic, bringing the famous total of 613 mitzvot up
       to 620.
    3. Gezeira dirabanan. A rabbinic "fence". These are enacted to
       prevent a common cause for breaking the act of the law. For
       example, one may not place food directly on a fire before Shabbat
       in order to keep it heated during Shabbat. This is a fence around
       the law against cooking on Shabbat. To prevent the gezeira from
       being violated, a metal cover, called a blech in Yiddish, is
       placed on the stove top before Shabbat with the flame (turned to a
       low setting) under one section and the pot with food placed on the
       blech. This blech serves as a fence, allowing heating of the food
       without any danger of violating the law. Note that a "gezeira
       dirabanan" becomes binding only if it is accepted by the
       community.
    4. P'sak. A rabbinic ruling. This ruling addresses a the questionable
       area of some law or custom. A p'sak can only be over ruled by
       another body which is both larger in number, and greater in
       "chochmah". (The ability to know how to use the facts. Not more
       knowledgeable book-wise, but more steeped in the Torah
       weltanschauung.)
       
   The distinction between the second and third categories is subtle. In
   order to be a Din (or Issur, or Melachah) Dirabanan, the prohibited
   action must be similar in purpose to the permitted one. A gezeira does
   not even require an action. In the example I gave, it was inaction,
   leaving the pot where it is, that is prohibited. The category includes
   things that are similar in means to the prohibited act, and will
   therefore cause confusion about what is and what isn't okay; and
   things which will allow people to be caught up in habit, and forget
   about the prohibition. Only a gezeira may defy an actual Divine law
   (although a p'sak will often define one), and even so only under
   specific circumstances. All of the following must be satisfied:

     * The law being protected is more stringent than the one being
       violated. This determination isn't easy.

     * The law is being violated only through inaction. No one is being
       told to actively violate G-d's commandment.

     * The law being violated will still be applicable in most
       situations. It still must exist in some form.
       
   On the other hand, a gezeira is less powerful than a normal rabbinic
   law in that they can not be compounded. One may not make a "fence" for
   the express purpose of protecting another "fence". A law is considered
   accepted if it becomes common practice. Any din or gezeira which does
   not get accepted by the masses in the short run, does not become
   binding in the long run. Similarly, there are rules for p'sak, but
   they are violated if the masses choose to follows some other rabbinic
   body's p'sak. Notice, however, that this is only in the short run.
   Once a law is accepted, it may only be overruled by p'sak. It cannot
   just fade into non-practice.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.3: Traditionally, what are the different rabbinic eras?

Answer:
   
   For traditional Torah scholars, the end of each era is marked by a
   book that gets accepted by the masses as authoritative. This seals the
   acts of that era as a whole as accepted, authoritative p'sak.
   Therefore, any ruling by those who live after this era must be
   supported by an opinion of that era.
   
   The first such book (and the first written book of the Oral law) is
   the Mishna. There are other compilations of the Tanaitic material, the
   Braisos (Baraitot), the Tosefta, and Midrashai Halakha (Mekhilta,
   Sifra, and Sifre), but it is the Mishna that marks the end of the
   Tanaitic era (70-200 CE). It was the Mishna that was accepted by the
   people.
   
   The second is the Babylonian Talmud. The Jerusalem Talmud is less
   authoritative because it was developed for a shorter time than the
   Babylonian Talmud. The Talmud marks the end of the Amoraic era
   (220-500 CE).
   
   The next era was the period of the Sabora'im (500-650CE). At this
   time, the Jewish sages in Persia who were the rabbinic leaders of
   their time. They contributed much to the finishing of Talmud Bavli;
   Jews in this area continued to live in a relatively stable
   environment. In contrast, Jews at this time in Israel were living
   under the oppressive rule of the Byzantines.
   
   There is a Ga'onic era in Jewish history (650-1250CE), but not in
   Jewish law, since there is no book that was accepted as the end of
   that era. At this time, Jews were living in Southern Europe and Asia
   Minor under the often intolerant rule of Christian Kings and clerics.
   Most Jews lived in the Muslim Arab realm (Israel, North Africa,
   Babylonia). Despite periods of persecution, Jewish communal and
   cultural life flowered in this period. The universally recognized
   centers of Jewish life were in Sura and Pumbeditha (Babylonia); The
   heads of these law schools were the Geonim, who were consulted on
   matters of law by Jews throughout the world.
   
   The next such book(s) is the Shulchan Aruch (by R' Caro), the
   authoritative Sephardic resource, and the Mappah (Ramah), which has
   the Ashkenazic rulings when different (Note that both are in the same
   book; see the general reading list). This delineated the period of the
   Rishonim (The First Ones) (1250-1550CE). A Rishon may argue with
   another Rishon, or with a Ga'on (since there is no Halachic concept of
   the Gaonic era), but can only argue with an Amora if he has another
   Amora in his support. He cannot use a Tana that was rejected by the
   Amora'im as support, since that would be overruling a p'sak of someone
   greater in chochmah.
   
   Most Jews in the period of the Rishonim lived in the Mediterranean
   basin or in Western Europe under feudal systems. With the decline of
   both the Muslim and Jewish centers of power in Iraq, there was no
   single place in the world which was a recognized center for deciding
   matters of Jewish law and practice. Consequently, the rabbis
   recognized the need for writing commentaries on the Torah and Talmud
   and for writing law codes that would allow Jews anywhere in the world
   to be able to continue living in the Jewish tradition.
   
   Anyone after the Shulchan Aruch is called an Acharon (The Last Ones)
   (1550CE to present). An Acharon can only disagree with a Rishon when
   he is taking the position of another Rishon. There are strict rules
   for change.
   
   Liberal Jews tend to justify halachic change by ascribing greater
   authority to present generations (or even to individuals) than to past
   generations of sages.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.4: How can differing halachic rulings all be considered
         valid?

Answer:
   
   When both parties agree upon the underlying requirements. For example,
   rabbis would agree that one may only eat a kosher animal that was
   slaughtered properly. But they might differ as to the particulars of
   what constitutes proper kosher slaughtering.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.5: How does the Conservative movement deal with Halachic
         questions?

Answer:
   
   Conservative Jews view the laws and customs from the various law
   codes, such as the Mishneh Torah and Shulkhan Arukh, as the basis for
   binding Jewish law, and allow for law to be modified by today's
   halakhic authorities. While accepting the dictates of the movement's
   Rabbinical Assembly as normative, Conservative Jews also accept that
   rulings of Orthodox and Traditional (i.e., Union for Traditional
   Judaism) rabbis are legitimate halakhic positions.
   
   Jewish law and custom, as followed traditionally, is preserved by
   Conservative Judaism as much as possible. Changes are not made for
   their own sake, but rather to deal with an urgent, acute problem, with
   a preference for lenient ruling over strict ones. This approach is
   based Talmud Bavli, which states "The strength of a lenient ruling is
   greater" [Talmud Bavli, Berakhot, 60a]
   
   Before giving a halakhic ruling, Conservative Judaism studies the
   subject in a historic and scientific fashion to determine if the law
   came from the Torah, the Talmudic sages, the early rabbis (Geonim and
   Rishonim) or the later rabbis (Acharonim). This is because there is
   generally more readiness to change a new law or something which is
   only a custom.
   
   Note that Conservative Judaism does not view the Shulkhan Arukh as the
   ultimate authority in matters of Jewish law and custom.
   
   The central halakhic authority in Conservative Judaism is the
   Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS), which was founded by the
   Rabbinical Assembly (RA) in the 1920s. It is composed of 25 rabbis,
   who are voting members, and five laypeople, who do not vote, but
   participate fully in deliberations. When any six members vote in favor
   of a position, that position becomes a validated position of the
   committee, thus there is the possibility that any issue can generate
   from one to four official positions.
   
   Unanimous decisions become the official position of the Conservative
   movement. When more than one position is validated, each
   congregational rabbi functions as the mara de-atra (local rabbinic
   authority), adopting for their congregation the position he or she
   considers most compelling. In the overwhelming majority of cases,
   Conservative rabbis choose among the law committee's validated
   positions. On rare occasions, an individual rabbi may ignore the
   committee and act in accordance with his or her own convictions
   regarding what is halakhically correct.
   
   CJLS decisions are not absolutely enforceable on rabbis, except
   regarding 'standards'. A standard requires an 80% vote of the full
   membership of the CJLS and a majority vote by the plenum of the
   Rabbinical Assembly. Willful violations have led to resignations or
   expulsions from membership of the Rabbinical Assembly (RA). At
   present, there are four standards:
    1. A complete prohibition on rabbis and cantors to officiate in any
       way at intermarriages.
    2. A complete prohibition against officiating at the remarriage of a
       Jew whose previous marriage has not been halakhically terminated,
       whether by a halakhic divorce [get], hafka'at Kiddushin [annulment
       of the marriage], or death.
    3. A complete prohibition against taking any action that would
       intimate that native Jewishness can be confirmed in any way but
       matrilineal descent.
    4. A complete prohibition against supervising a conversion to Judaism
       that does not include circumcision for males, and immersion in a
       mikveh for both males and females.
       
   The Rabbinical Assembly of Israel (Israeli arm of the RA) has its own
   decision making body, the Va'ad Halacha. Responsa by both the CJLS and
   the Va'ad Halacha are equally valid. Due to different social
   circumstances, the CJLS and the Va'ad do not always come up with the
   same teshuva. In such a case a rabbi is free to decide which responsa
   to use. In addition, the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism
   (USCJ) maintains its own list of binding standards for all synagogues
   associated with the movement. Among other things, these standards
   mandate observance of the Sabbath and the laws of Kashrut.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.6: What is the difference between two Orthodox rabbis who
         disagree and an Orthodox and a Reform who disagree?

Answer:
   
   How could two people have two different, logically developed opinions
   on any issue? :-)
   
   In answering this, there are two important points to keep in mind:

     * Most decisions are not simply bilateral yes/no decisions

     * Valid interpretations according to traditional hermeneutics that
       differ in particulars of a particular place/time can survive
       concurrently (cf. any modern legal system)
       
   The Orthodox rabbis would both say that their halachic rulings are in
   line with the tradition of Torah learning, all the way from Sinai, and
   that their difference is in details. The Reform rabbi, however, might
   derive a ruling from other sources of morality, such as secular
   ethical notions of equality.
   
   Reform Rabbi Walter Jacob writes, in Contemporary American Reform
   Responsa that "Our path in America is clear and our halakhic stance is
   akin to the pluralism of the past from the days of Hillel and Shammai
   in the first century through the entire rabbinic period to our own
   time." Orthodox rabbis would counter that the schools of Hillel and
   Shammai differed on the particulars of halacha (with the understanding
   being that the multiplicity of debate was a byproduct of a disucssion
   of students, not disciples, resulting in flaws of transmission). Thus,
   the Orthodox scholars believe there was no disagreement over first
   principles, while Orthodox and Reform differ significantly on major
   principles, such as Torah being from G-d, and the authority of
   individuals to decide halacha for themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.7: Who is RAMBAM that is mentioned & what are his 13
         principles

Answer:
   
   Moses Maimonides (Rabbi Moshe ben Maimon, usually referred to in
   Hebrew by the acronym "Rambam") was one of the towering figures in
   medieval intellectual and religious life. In addition to his law code,
   he excelled in the fields of philosophy, science, medicine, exegesis
   and communal leadership. Though born in Spain, in his youth his family
   fled religious persecution, settling in Egypt. Maimonides' literary
   output includes: a work on philosophical logic; an Arabic commentary
   to the Mishnah; an enumeration of the 613 precepts of the Torah; the
   Mishneh Torah law code; the Arabic philosophical treatise The Guide of
   the Perplexed; and many letters and responsa addressed to various
   Jewish communities.
   
   The RAMBAM's 13 principles, as expressed in the Artscroll Siddur
   (pages 178-180) are as follows:
    1. G-d's Existence
    2. G-d is a complete and total unity
    3. G-d is not physical
    4. G-d is eternal and the First Source
    5. Prayers should be directed to G-d
    6. G-d communicates with man
    7. Moses' prophecy is unique
    8. The entire Torah is G-d-given
    9. The Torah is unchangeable
   10. G-d knows man's thoughts and deeds
   11. Reward and punishment
   12. The Messiah will come
   13. The dead will live again
       
   It would take volumes to explain what these mean, but a good
   "catechism" of Jewish beliefs is the Handbook of Jewish Thought by R'
   Aryeh Kaplan.
   
   See Also: Section 3.36. Torah: What is the Mishneh Torah (Yad
   Ha-Hazaqah , Sefer Mehoqeq)?

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.8: Who was Rashi?

Answer:
   
   Rabbi Shlomo Ben Yitzchak, 1040-1105. Usually called Rabbi Shlomo
   Yitzchaki. He was the author of a massive commentary on almost all of
   Tanach and most of the Talmud. His fame rests not only on the content
   of his explanations but on their style that remains clear and concise
   throughout. His commentary has become the most comprehensive and
   popular in existence and provided the basis for most subsequent
   studies of the Tanach, Talmud, and Jewish Law.
   
   His commentary on Chumash, first printed in 1465, was the first dated
   Hebrew book, and appears in a special script now know as "Rashi
   script". His commentaries are considered the standard work without
   which it is impossible to understand the Talmud.
   
   See also: Section 3.18. Torah: What is Rashi's commentary on the
   Talmud?

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.9: Who was the Ramban?

Answer:
   
   Rabbi Moshe Ben Nachmon, Nachmanides, 1194-1270. He wrote a commentary
   on Torah and halachah, and more than 50 other lucid and logical works.
   He participated in a disputation (theological argument with the
   Catholic Church) in Barcelona in 1263; although he won, he was forced
   to flee Spain, and as a result all future disputations forbade the
   Jewish participants to answer frankly. At age 72 he settled in
   Jerusalem, reorganized the Jewish community, and moved to Acco to
   become head its Jewish community.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.10: What is Kabbalah and how can I learn about it?

Answer:
   
   It's important to differentiate between the popular notion of Kabbalah
   and the concept within traditional Judaism. In the popular culture,
   Kabbalah is perceived as a form of magic or the occult, studied for
   selfish personal gain. This misinformed idea resulted from those who
   adapted Jewish ideas out of the context of Jewish belief and practice,
   warping it away from its foundations to their own purposes. These
   include medieval Christian mystics, neo-pagan groups, and contemporary
   "new age" movements.
   
   Within Judaism, though, Kabbalah is the part of Torah that addresses
   the process of creation ("Ma'aseh B'raisheet") and the relationship
   that G-d maintains with creation ("Ma'aseh Merkavah"). As such it is
   the Torah's inner aspect. Some traditions say that some of the key
   texts go as far back as the Patriarch Abraham.
   
   Parts of Kabbalah, such as the Zohar and Rabbi Moshe Cordovero's
   "Pardes Rimonim," are accessible, but difficult to understand without
   a firm grounding in the more basic Jewish sources and an informed
   teacher. Other parts remain hidden and unavailable to the public.
   Parts have been committed to print, but others remain as closely held,
   orally transmitted tradition.
   
   The most accessible, traditionally accurate books for English language
   study of the topic are Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan's "Innerspace, Introduction
   to Kabbalah, Meditation and Prophecy" (Moznaim Publishing, Brooklyn
   NY), "Meditation and Kabbalah," "Kabbalah and the Bible" (Samuel
   Weiser and Sons, New York), and "Jewish Meditation" (Schocken, New
   York). Lubavitcher Chassidim recommend directed study of the Tanya.
   (Kehot Publications, New York)
   
   Additional information may be found in the Mysticism Reading List.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 4.11: Who is allowed to study Kabbalah?

Answer:
   
   The Kabbalah deals with sensitive topics and the knowledge it offers
   has been warped, even within the Jewish community. This resulted in
   severe disruption of the Eastern European Jewish community (for
   example, the false messiah Shabbtai Tzvi and the Frankists). As a
   result, the non-Chassidic sages placed a ban on the study of three
   basic texts until the age of 30, until the age of 40 for general
   study, and in all cases until one has studied the more basic Jewish
   sources (Tanakh, Talmud, Halacha) in depth. However, in Sephardic and
   Chassidic communities, some basic texts are studied even by young
   folks.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.09.09 06:33


End of SCJ FAQ Part 3 (Torah and Halachic Authority) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:14 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yo-000OVdC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:14 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05146
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:53 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 308AD7A109
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:16 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id D16887A12A
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:10 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28098 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:35 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:35 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032535.28097.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 04-Observance
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 93067
Lines: 1881

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Observance, Marriage, Women in Judaism (4/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.4>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/04-Observance
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Questions about Observance (Holidays, Kashrut, Shabbat) and Women
Message-ID: <faq.4_970423621@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/04-Observance
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.04-Observance
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
		Part 4: Observance, Marriage, Women in Judaism
                    [Last Post: Sun Oct  1 11:07:08 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                 Section 5:
                              Jewish Holidays
                                      
    1. What are the different holidays? 
    2. What are the dates of the upcoming Jewish holidays? 
    3. How can I get a Jewish calendar 
    4. Why do some people take off one day, and others two? 
    5. Why does the Jewish day start at sundown? 
    6. What are the origins of the Chanukah Dreidel? 

                                 Section 6:
                       Jewish Dietary Law and Kashrut
                                      
    1. What is Kosher? Doesn't a rabbi just bless the food 
    2. How can I learn about Kashrut? Is there a "Kosher" FAQ? 
    3. There are a wide variety of kosher symbols. How do I learn who's
       behind them? 
    4. I'm going to be in (insert city here). How do I find the kosher
       restaurants? 
    5. Do I need to have a kosher kitchen and kosher home to keep kosher?
    6. I have heard that Polish Orthodox Jews wait 6 hours between eating
       milchig and fleishig and Dutch Orthodox Jews wait about an hour.
       Why? 
    7. Why do Sephardim and Ashkenazim have different customs regarding
       permissible foods on Pesach (Passover)? 
    8. I'm a vegetarian health-food proponent. Is kosher food healthier? 
    9. Is vegetarianism kosher? 

                                 Section 7:
                       Sabbath and Holiday Observance
                                      
    1. What is the Jewish Sabbath and why is it on Saturday? 
    2. Why do my Orthodox Jewish friends leave work early on Fridays and
       before Jewish holidays? 
    3. Why can't Jews use electrical appliances and motor vehicles on
       Shabbat? 

                                 Section 8:
                             Woman and Marriage
                                      
    1. What role do women play in Judaism? 
    2. What is the Conservative view of the role of women in Judaism? 
    3. What is the Reform view of the role of women in Judaism? 
    4. What is the Orthodox view of the role of women in Judaism? 
    5. Is it true that Orthodox men bless G-d every morning for not
       making them a woman? What do you mean, this isn't terrible? 
    6. I've heard polygamy is permissible among Sephardic and Yemenite
       Jews. Doesn't Judaism mandate monogamy? 
    7. What does clean/unclean refer to? 
    8. I've heard that Orthodox men can't touch women. Is this true? 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 5.1: What are the different holidays?

Answer:
   
   The holidays are described in the list below. R' Donin's book To Be a
   Jew gives a good overview of the holidays from a traditional
   perspective. The following is based on a summary posted on the net by
   Robert Kaiser, which in turn was based on material from A Guide to
   Jewish Religious Practice by Rabbi Isaac Klein, published by The
   Jewish Theological Seminary of America. Note that liberal Jews do not
   observe all of these holidays, nor do they all follow the practice of
   two-days of observance of certain holidays in the diaspora. The
   principal year-cycle events observed by liberal Jews are: Shabbat,
   Rosh Hashana, Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Simchat Torah, Chanukkah, Tu
   B'Shevat, Purim, Pesach (Passover), Lag B'Omer, Shavuot, and Tish'a
   B'Av.
   
   Note also that as the Jewish day runs from sundown to sundown,
   holidays start the evening of the secular day before secular calendar
   date of the holiday.
   
   Rosh Hashanah (Tishri 1)
          Also known as Yom Hadin, Yom Hazikaron (Day of Remembrance) and
          Yom Teruah (Day of the sounding of the shofar). This holiday
          celebrates the creation of the world, and as such is the new
          year for calculating calendar years, sabbatical and jubilee
          years, vegetable tithes, and tree-planting (determining the age
          of a tree). This holiday is characterized by the blowing of the
          shofar. During the afternoon of the first day, many follow the
          practice of tashlikh, symbolically casting away sins by
          throwing stones into the waters.
          
   Fast of Gedaliah (Tishri 3)
          This fast commemorates the slaying of Gedaliah Ben Akhikam,
          whom Nebuchadnezzar appointed governor of Judah after the first
          destruction of the Temple (Jeremiah 40:7, II Kings 25:22.) His
          death was the final blow to hopes that the Jewish state might
          survive the Babylonian domination.
          
   Yom Kippur (Tishri 10)
          The day of repentance. The holiest and most solemn day of the
          year. Its central theme is atonement and reconciliation.
          Traditionally, there are prohibitions on eating, drinking,
          bathing, and conjugal relations. Most of these prohibitions are
          followed across the spectrum of Judaism--such is the importance
          of this holy day. Yom Kippur services begin with Kol Nidrei,
          which must be recited before sunset. A Talit is donned for
          evening prayers--the only evening service of the year in which
          this is done. The Ne'ilah service is a special service held
          only on the day of Yom Kippur, and deals with the closing of
          the holiday. Yom Kippur comes to an end with the blowing of the
          shofar, which marks the conclusion of the fast.
          
   Sukkot (Tishri 15)
          The third Pilgrimage festival, it is also known as The Feast of
          Booths (Tabernacles), The Feast of Ingathering, or just simply
          The Hag (The Festival). Sukkot is an eight day festival: the
          first two days are celebrated as full holidays, the following
          five days (Hol Hamo'ed) are weekdays that retain some aspects
          of the festival, the seventh day (Hoshanah Rabbah) and eighth
          (Shemini Atzeret) days have special observances of their own.
          Liberal congregations typically only celebrate the first and
          eighth days.
          
          Sukkot commemorates the life of the Israelites in the desert
          during their journey to the promised land. During their
          wandering in the desert they lived in booths (Sukkot). Four
          species of plants are used to celebrate the holiday: the lulav
          (palm branch), etrog (lemon-like citron), myrtle, and willow.
          The etrog is handled separately, while the other three species
          are bound together, and are collectively referred to as the
          lulav.
          
          During the five intermediate days of Sukkot, it is customary to
          read the book of Ecclesiastes.
          
   Hosha'nah Rabbah (The seventh day of Sukkot).
          This day closes the period of repentance that began on Rosh
          Hashanah. Tradition has made this day into a sequel to the Days
          of Awe, lengthening the period of penitence and postponing the
          day when final sentence is to be rendered.
          
   Shemini Atzeret (Tishri 22)
          The eighth day of Sukkot. In the Talmud it is written that "the
          eighth day [of Sukkot] is a separate festival", so Sukkot is
          really observed as seven days, and Shemini Atzeret is observed
          as a separate holiday. It marks the beginning of the rainy
          season in Israel.
          
   Simhat Torah (Tishri 23)
          Rejoicing with the Torah. The finale of Sukkot.
          
          In Israel, Sukkot is eight days long, including Shemini
          Atzeret. Outside Israel (the Diaspora), Sukkot is nine days
          long. Thus the eighth day is Shemini Atzeret, and the extra
          (ninth) day is Simchat Torah. In Israel, the festivities and
          customs associated with Simchat Torah are celebrated on Shemini
          Atzeret.
          
          The last portion of the Torah is read on this day. The
          following Shabbat the reading of the Torah starts again at the
          beginning of Bereshis (Genesis). Festivities begin in the
          evening with Ma'ariv. There are seven hakafot (processions) of
          the Torah around the Synagogue. Services are joyous, and
          humorous deviations from the standard service are allowed, and
          even expected.
          
   Chanukah (Kislev 25)
          Also known as Hag Ha'urim (The Festival of Lights).
          
          The story of Chanukah is preserved in the books of the First
          and Second Maccabees. These books are not part of the Tanakh,
          but are part of the Apocrypha (Hebrew historical and religious
          material that was not codified as part of the Bible.) The
          miracle of Chanukah is referred to in the Talmud, but not in
          the books of the Maccabees. It marks the defeat of Assyrian
          forces who had tried to prevent Israel from practicing Judaism.
          Judah Maccabee and his brothers destroyed the overwhelming
          forces, and rededicated the Temple. The eight day festival is
          marked by the kindling of lights with a special Menorah, called
          a Chanukiah.
          
   The Fast of the Tenth of Tevet (Tevet 10)
          The fast marks the beginning of the siege of Jerusalem by the
          forces of Nebuchadnezzar, and is thus connected with the
          destruction of Jerusalem. This is not observed by liberal Jews.
          
   Tu B'shevat (Shevat 15)
          The new year for trees. This day was set aside in the Mishna on
          which to bring fruit tithes. It is still celebrated in modern
          times. In the 1600's, Rabbi Yitzchak Luria of Safed and his
          disciples created a short sedar, somewhat reminiscent of the
          sedar observed on Pesach, that explores the holiday's
          Kabbalistic themes.
          
   Purim (Adar 14)
          This festival commemorates the events found in the Book of
          Esther. The Shabbat preceding Purim is called Shabbat Zachor
          (the Sabbath of remembrance). The day before Purim - Adar 13 -
          is the Fast of Esther. The book of Esther is written in the
          form of a scroll - the Megillah. It is chanted on Purim in the
          evening, and on the next day after the Torah reading.
          
   Shushan Purim (Adar 15)
          In the Book of Esther, the rejoicing in the walled city of
          Shushan took place one day later (Adar 15) than elsewhere (Adar
          14). Therefore, this day has come to be known as Shushan Purim.
          
          To the present day, Purim is observed on Adar 15 in such cities
          --- most notably Jerusalem --- as were walled cities at the
          time of the events described in the Book of Esther.
          
   New Year for Kings (Nisan 1)
          Nisan is the first month of the Hebrew calendar; in Mishnaic
          times it was celebrated as the New Year for Kings and months.
          In addition to this "new year", the Mishna sets up three other
          New Year's: Elul 1, for animal tithes, Tishrei 1 (Rosh
          HaShanah), and Shevat 15, the New Year for Trees/fruit tithes.
          Ever since the Babylonian diaspora, only the Rosh HaShanah and
          Tu B'Shevat are still celebrated.
          
   Tzom Bechorot: The Fast of the First Born (Nisan 14)
          In commemoration of the slaying of the first-born sons of the
          Egyptians as the Tenth Plague visited on Pharaoh, while their
          Hebrew counterparts were "passed over" (i.e. spared, hence the
          English name Passover for Pesach), first-born sons are required
          to observe a minor fast on the day before Passover. However, if
          they attend a simcha (joyous occasion) such as a wedding or a
          siyum (a celebration marking the completion of the study of a
          tractate of the Talmud), they are allowed to break the fast.
          Therefore most Orthodox synagogues arrange for a siyum on that
          day.
          
   Pesach (Nisan 15)
          The first Pilgrimage Festival (recall that Nisan, not Tishri,
          is the first month of the Hebrew calendar). Pesach commemorates
          the liberation of the Israelites from Egypt. The first seder is
          on the 14th. On the night of the 15th, the second seder is
          held, and the counting of the Omer starts. The Omer is a
          counting down of the days from the time of the departure from
          Egypt, until the time the Torah was received at Mount Sinai.
          
   Sefirah (The counting)
   Sefirat Ha'Omer
          Also known simply as The Omer, this 49 day period between
          Pesach and Shavuot is defined by the Torah as the period to
          bring special offerings to the temple in Jerusalem; This makes
          physical the spiritual connection between Pesach and Shavuot.
          Pesach marks the liberation from Egypt, and Shavuot marks the
          receiving of the Torah. The counting begins the second night of
          Pesach.
          
          Traditionally, the Sefirah is a time of sadness. During this
          period, 12,000 of Rabbi Akiva's disciples died. This occurred
          during the Hadrianic persecution that followed the Bar Kokhba
          revolt, in which Rabbi Akiva was involved. During this period
          (with one exception), customarily no weddings take place, no
          hair is cut, and no activities occur involving dancing and
          music. The period is more culturally-dependant than the ban
          itself. In some cultures, the period is from Pesach to Lag
          B'Omer. Others go from Rosh Chodesh Iyyar to Shavuot. Yom
          Haatzmaut and Yom Yerushalaim are days on which people who
          celebrate them take haircuts or take haircuts the day before.
          
   Yom Ha'Shoah (Nisan 27)
          Holocaust remembrance day. See Yom Yerushalayim.
          
   Yom Hazikaron (Iyar 4)
          Day of remembrance. In honor of Israeli veterans of the War of
          Independence. See Yom Yerushalayim.
          
   Yom Ha'atzma'ut (Iyar 5)
          Israel Independence Day. See Yom Yerushalayim.
          
   Lag Ba'Omer (Iyar 18--The 33rd day of the Omer)
          Lag Ba'Omer takes place during the Sefirah. During this day
          there was a break in the Hadrianic persecution. Weddings and
          joyful occasions are permitted.
          
   Yom Yerushalayim (Iyar 28)
          Yom Yerushalayim (Jerusalem Day) marks the reunification of
          Jerusalem and The Temple Mount under Jewish rule almost 1900
          years after the destruction of the Second Temple.
          
          The Hallel [a series of prayers of praise] is recited by most
          Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform congregations. Israel's
          Chief Rabbis advocate reciting Hallel with a blessing.
          
          The new holidays of Yom Yerushalayim, Yom Hazikaron, Yom
          Ha'atzma'ut and Yom HaShoah are still too new for any consensus
          to have developed in the Jewish community as to the appropriate
          liturgy. Many liberal Jews observe them (and create new
          liturgies for them). Traditional Jews vary in the observance of
          these days. Some observe them. Some prefer to commemorate
          Churban Europa on Tisha B'Av along with the other catastrophes
          which have befallen the Jewish people. Some celebrate the
          Israel-related days, but don't assign them religious
          significance, and others ignore all three.
          
   Shavuot (Sivan 6, 7)
          The second Pilgrimage Festival, it is also known as The Feast
          of Weeks, Hag Haqatsir (The harvest festival), Hag HaShavuot,
          or just 'Atseret (The conclusion of Pesach). [Literally, the
          Hebrew word 'atseret' means conclusion.] Shavuot marks the end
          of the counting of the Omer. According to Rabbinic tradition,
          the Ten Commandments were given on this day. It is customary to
          read the Book of Ruth on this day.
          
   The Fast of the Seventeenth of Tamuz (Tamuz 17)
          Mentioned by the prophet Zechariah, the 17th of Tamuz marks the
          beginning of the destruction of Jerusalem. On this day in 70
          C.E. the Romans breached the walls encircling Jerusalem, which
          led to the destruction of the second Temple. (During the siege
          preceding the first destruction of the Temple in 587 B.C.E.,
          the Babylonians breached the walls on the ninth of Tamuz
          (Jeremiah 39:2), but both events are commemorated on the same
          date. The actual destruction of the Temple itself took place on
          the 9th of Av--both in 587 B.C.E. and 70 C.E. See Tisha B'Av.)
          
          For the traditional, this day is observed by fasting. The fast
          begins at sunrise and concludes at sunset of the same day. this
          applies to all fasts, with the exception of Yom Kippur and
          Tisha B'Av, both of which begin on the preceding night. Fasting
          is the only restriction imposed; Working and bathing as usual
          are permitted.
          
   The Three Weeks (Tamuz 17-Av 9) and The Nine Days (Av 1-Av 9)
          For the traditional, the days between the 17th of Tamuz and the
          9th of Av are considered days of mourning, for they witnessed
          the collapse of Jerusalem. In the Ashkenazi Jewish minhag
          (custom), weddings and other joyful occasions are traditionally
          not held in this period.
          
          A further element is added within the three weeks, during the
          nine days between the 1st and 9th day of Av. During this
          period, the pious refrain from eating meat and drinking wine,
          except on Shabbat or at a Seudat Mitzvah (such as a Pidyon
          Haben or completing the study of a religious text.) Many
          minhags observe a ban on cutting one's hair during this period.
          However, the length of time varies: some refrain only during
          the week in which Tisha B'Av falls.
          
   Tisha B'Av (Av 9)
          The saddest day of the Jewish calendar. On this day both the
          First and Second Temples were destroyed. (587 b.c.e. and 70
          c.e.) On this day in 1290, King Edward I signed the edict
          compelling the Jews to leave England. The Jewish expulsion from
          Spain in 1492 also occurred on this day. Tisha B'av also marked
          the outbreak of World War I.
          
          The fast of Tisha B'av begins after Ma'ariv services, Sefer
          Eicha (the book of Lamentations) is read. This is followed by
          the reading of Kinot, sorrowful hymns that emphasize the import
          of the fast. On the day of the ninth, Tallit and tefillin are
          not worn during Shachrit services, as a sign of mourning.
          
   New Year for Animal Tithes (Taxes) (Elul 1)
          This day is set up by the Mishna as the New Year for animal
          tithes, which roughly corresponds to a new year for taxes. This
          is similar to the tax deadline in the United States of America,
          on April 15. The date is disputed; Some authorities claim that
          it was observed on Tishrei 1 (Rosh HaShanah). The actual date
          is now merely academic; This holiday has not been observed
          since the Babylonian diaspora.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 5.2: What are the dates of the upcoming Jewish holidays?

Answer:
   
   [The following is courtesy of the Hebcal program, mentioned in Section
   5.3]
   
   2000:

     * January: 8 Rosh Chodesh Shvat, 22 Tu B'Shvat

     * February: 6-7 Rosh Chodesh Adar I, 21 Purim katan

     * March: 7 Rosh Chodesh Adar II, 19 Ta'anit Esther, 20 Purim, 21
       Shushan Purim

     * April: 5-6 Rosh Chodesh Nisan, 19 Erev Pesach, 20-27 Pesach

     * May: 2 Yom HaShoah, 5-6 Rosh Chodesh Iyyar, 9 Yom HaZikaron, 10
       Yom Ha'atzmaut, 23 Lag B'Omer

     * June: 1 Yom Yerushalayim, 4 Rosh Chodesh Sivan, 9-10 Shavuot

     * July: 3-4 Rosh Chodesh Tamuz, 20 Shiva Assar B'Tamuz

     * August: 2 Rosh Chodesh Av, 10 Tish'a B'Av, 31-Sep 1 Rosh Chodesh
       Elul

     * September: 1 Rosh Chodesh Elul, 29 Erev Rosh Hashana, 30-Oct 1
       Rosh Hashana

     * October: 1 Rosh Hashana II, 2 Tzom Gedalia, 8 Erev Yom Kippur, 9
       Yom Kippur, 14-20 Sukkot, 21 Shmini Atzeret, 22 Simchat Torah,
       29-30 Rosh Chodesh Cheshvan

     * November: 28 Rosh Chodesh Kislev

     * December: 22-29 Chanukah, 27 Rosh Chodesh Tevet
       
   2001:

     * January: 25-26 Rosh Chodesh Shvat

     * February: 8 Tu B'Shvat, 23-24 Rosh Chodesh Adar

     * March: 8 Ta'anit Esther, 9 Purim, 10 Shushan Purim, 25-26 Rosh
       Chodesh Nisan

     * April: 7 Erev Pesach, 8-15 Pesach, 20 Yom HaShoah, 23-24 Rosh
       Chodesh Iyyar, 25 Yom HaZikaron, 26 Yom Ha'atzmaut

     * May: 11 Lag B'Omer, 21 Yom Yerushalayim, 23-24 Rosh Chodesh Sivan,
       28-29 Shavuot

     * June: 21-22 Rosh Chodesh Tamuz

     * July: 8 Shiva Assar B'Tamuz, 21-22 Rosh Chodesh Av, 29 Tish'a B'Av

     * August: 19-20 Rosh Chodesh Elul

     * September: 17 Erev Rosh Hashana, 18-19 Rosh Hashana, 20 Tzom
       Gedalia, 26 Erev Yom Kippur, 27 Yom Kippur

     * October: 2-8 Sukkot, 9 Shmini Atzeret, 10 Simchat Torah, 17-18
       Rosh Chodesh Cheshvan

     * November: 16-17 Rosh Chodesh Kislev

     * December: 10-17 Chanukah, 15-16 Rosh Chodesh Tevet
       
   2002:

     * January: 14-15 Rosh Chodesh Shvat, 28 Tu B'Shvat

     * February: 12-13 Rosh Chodesh Adar, 25 Ta'anit Esther, 26 Purim, 27
       Shushan Purim

     * March: 14-15 Rosh Chodesh Nisan, 27 Erev Pesach, 28-31 Pesach I-IV

     * April: 1-4 Pesach V-VIII, 9 Yom HaShoah, 12-13 Rosh Chodesh Iyyar,
       16 Yom HaZikaron, 17 Yom Ha'atzmaut, 30 Lag B'Omer

     * May: 9 Yom Yerushalayim, 12-13 Rosh Chodesh Sivan, 17-18 Shavuot

     * June: 10-11 Rosh Chodesh Tamuz, 27 Shiva Assar B'Tamuz

     * July: 10-11 Rosh Chodesh Av, 18 Tish'a B'Av

     * August: 8-9 Rosh Chodesh Elul

     * September: 6 Erev Rosh Hashana, 7-8 Rosh Hashana, 9 Tzom Gedalia,
       15 Erev Yom Kippur, 16 Yom Kippur, 21-27 Sukkot, 28 Shmini
       Atzeret, 29 Simchat Torah

     * October: 6-7 Rosh Chodesh Cheshvan

     * November: 5-6 Rosh Chodesh Kislev, 30 Chanukah I

     * December: 1-7 Chanukah II-VIII, 5-6 Rosh Chodesh Tevet
       
   Since the Jewish day starts at sunset, all of these holidays (except
   those marked "Erev", which means "Evening") start at sunset on the
   civil date before. (See Subject 7.2 for details.)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 5.3: How can I get a Jewish calendar?

Answer:
   
   Chabad-Lubavitch and other organizations publish calendars which
   include sunset times for various cities. Jewish funeral homes often
   distribute Jewish calendars to local synagogues around Rosh Hashana.
   Jewish bookstores and gift shops sell them as well.
   
   In terms of software to generate Hebrew calendars, there are a number
   of resources available:

     * Unix: 

          + Gnu Emacs. User's of gnu emacs will discover that there is a
            Jewish calendar built into Gnu Emacs. You invoke the calendar
            via M-x calendar. Once in the calendar, a number of different
            commands are available. In this context, it is worth noting
            that the list of holidays obtained from M-x holidays includes
            Jewish holidays, the key S can be used to obtain
            sunrise/sunset times for the selected date (you need to set
            latitude and longitude first; the relevant variables are
            calendar-latitute, calendar-longitude, and
            calendar-location-name. To display the hebrew date for a
            given day, use the sequence p h (calendar-print-hebrew-date),
            and to move to a date on the hebrew calendar, use g h
            (calendar-goto-hebrew-date).

          + Remind. This a sophisticated multi-lingual calendar and alarm
            system for UNIX. It produces web-based and PostScript
            calendars, and includes a powerful scripting language and
            friendly graphical front-end. It was developed by David
            Skoll. It is available at
            http://www.roaringpenguin.com/remind.html.

          + Hebcal. This is a Perpetual jewish calendar program by Danny
            Sadinoff.

     * Windows:

          + HEBREW CALENDAR FOR WINDOWS. Provides full-month calendars
            for Jewish/Hebrew date conversion. Holidays displayed with
            information available. Sunset/Sunrise, Shabbat times and
            zmanim. Anniversaries may be stored in personal database.
            Customized calendar printouts. Torah and Haftarah readings.
            Halakhic times of day (zmanim). Covers 1600-2200 (5360-5960).
            Clipboard, Notepad, and Cardfile support. Extensive city
            database. Lots more features. Available from the Home Page of
            the Calendar Maven (<http://www.calendar-maven.com>)

          + Kaluach. This program displays a full month (either Hebrew or
            civil) on the screen with all Jewish holidays, fast days
            (ta'aniot), Shabbat parshiot, counting of the omer (sfirat
            haomer), birchat hachama, and more. It provides daily
            halachic times (zmanim): alot hashachar, earliest time for
            tallit and tefillin, netz hachama (sunrise), latest times for
            shema and tefillah, chatzot hayom, mincha gedolah and
            ketanah, shkiat hachama (sunset), tzeit hakochavim. It also
            provides Shabbat times: hadlakat nerot (candle lighting) and
            tzeit shabbat (the end of Shabbat); Halachic times calculated
            according to selected shitot and location; and a choice of
            Hebrew or English language display (Hebrew support even under
            standard English Windows-- the Hebrew date is displayed in
            the Windows 95 status line when the window is minimized.
            Users can add personal data such as birthdays, anniversaries,
            and yahrzeits. Additional information available at
            http://members.tripod.com/~kaluach.
       

     * The Web: 

          + Steven Weintraub's JEWISH CALENDAR CALCULATION. This page
            gives a lot of information on the hebrew calendar, including
            code in various forms, a CGI interface, and a JAVA calendar

          + HaVeinu L'Shalom. This organization provides an online
            perpetual calendar in day or month at a time, as well as
            Kaballah/Jewish Astrology Calendar.

          + There is a JavaScript Jewish calendar at
            http://sites.netscape.net/cgiwpg/calendar.htm

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 5.4: Why do some people take off one day, and others two?

Answer:
   
   The Jewish calendar is based on a lunar system in which each month
   begins at the new moon. A month can consist of 29 or 30 days.
   
   Originally the determination of the new moon was by the Sanhedrin
   (highest rabbinic court, 70 members) when witnesses declared that they
   had seen the new moon. Once the Sanhedrin declared the new month,
   messages were sent to the various communities stating which day (of
   the two possible) began the new month.
   
   Note that this does not say that the Sanhedrin did not know the
   methods of calculating the new moon, but merely that proper procedure
   required the witnesses. The astronomical calculations could be used to
   verify the validity of the witnesses, if necessary.
   
   In those months in which holidays occurred, (such as Nisan for
   Pesach), the exact date was critical for determining when the holiday
   began. Since the messengers could not reach every community in the
   time allotted, those communities they could not reach would celebrate
   both possible days.
   
   In 325 CE, the Byzantine (Eastern Roman Empire) administration in what
   was then Palestine limited the rights of the Sanhedrin to disseminate
   calendrical information. Hillel II, the Sanhedrin President at the
   time, published a set of rules for the maintenance of the calendar,
   which is still used today.
   
   The Sanhedrin also determined that those communities outside of Eretz
   Yisrael would continue to keep the second day of the holiday because
   of a principal "Minhag Avoseinu Beyadeinu", the customs of our fathers
   [remain] in our hands, and to remember the law for when the Sanhedrin
   is reestablished and the month is determined by witnesses again.
   
   Reform Jews believe that since the calendar is defined exactly, there
   is no longer a need to keep the second day of Yom Tov outside of Eretz
   Yisrael. However some Reform Jews do choose to observe two days.
   
   Many Orthodox Jews feel that once the Sanhedrin is reestablished, that
   the declaration will be disseminated by CNN [Cable News Network] or
   maybe even soc.culture.jewish, and even the Jews outside of Eretz
   Yisrael will only be required to keep one day. However, until that
   time comes, the requirement is to maintain the calendar as established
   by the original Sanhedrin, which includes two days.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 5.5: Why does the Jewish day start at sundown?

Answer:
   
   Because this is how the Torah describes days, starting in the book of
   Genesis: "And there was evening, and there was morning, one day."
   (Gen. 1:5). As another example, the Torah refers to Yom Kippur
   explicitly as "from evening to the next evening".

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 5.6: What are the origins of the Chanukah Dreidel?

Answer:
   
   Both dreidel and grogger are traditional European toys, although the
   names they go by in non-Jewish cultures are quite different from the
   ones we use.
   
   The English (and Latin) name for the dreidel is teetotum -- and you
   can look up its history in the Oxford English Dictionary. It turns out
   to be an ancient gambling toy, known in ancient Greece, and with
   national variations on the letters on the faces of the toy. In all
   national variants, the letters are a mnemonic for the rules of the
   game. For example, the traditional English letters are:
   T - Take all
   H - Take half
   N - Nothing
   P - Put

   Although the fact that the Dreidel goes back to Greek times makes it
   possible that it was known in the Hashemonean kingdom, the fact that
   the Hebrew letters on the sides make a mnemonic that fits the pattern
   described above when used as initial letters of Yiddish words suggests
   that the dreidel entered Jewish culture through the Yiddish speaking
   Ashkenazi and is not of ancient origin.
   
   The OED entry for teetotum says that that the toy fell out of use
   because cards were far better gambling games, and that by the 1890's,
   it had been reduced to a children's toy in the English speaking world.
   
   In the Jewish world, according to Schauss's guide to Jewish Holy Days,
   the playing card fad of the middle ages led the rabbis issuing a
   series of edicts condemning excessive gambling. They didn't ban the
   dreidel, though, perhaps because the "A great miracle happened there"
   interpretation of the letters allowed the dreidel to escape their
   wrath.
   
   As to the grogger, the rest of the English speaking world calls them
   ratchets. You can buy orchestral ratchets from the precussion section
   of good music supply catalogs, and in much of the world, the ratchet
   is an important part of the equipment you take to things like soccer
   matches and new-years parties.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.1: What is Kosher? Doesn't a rabbi just bless the food?

Answer:
   
   Kosher ("fit") food must meet the complex requirements of Jewish law,
   and the supervising rabbi verifies that such is the case for a given
   food item, or item which will come in contact with food. There are
   restrictions on which foods are permitted during different times of
   the year, and a procedure for slaughtering permissible animals with
   minimal pain to the animal.
   
   The rabbi's role is to decide questions of Jewish law. In the area of
   kashrus, there are hundreds of details that must be met, and thousands
   of "oops, now what?" questions that must be answered. Animals, for
   example, are killed in a very precise manner, by a "shochet", and they
   must be checked internally for disease, have their blood removed by
   salting, feathers removed in cold water, and so on. Kosher wine may
   not come into gentile contact before pasteurization. Vegetables must
   be examined for insects. Because meat and dairy have to be carefully
   separated, precautions against milk-based additives have to taken. The
   complications can be immense.
   
   A rabbi will hire a mashgioch to do the actual supervision. The latter
   is supposed to call in the rabbi when a novel situation comes up.
   
   Note that the Reform movement does not mandate observance of the laws
   of Kashrut. Instead, it advises its members to study the laws of
   Kashrut and to follow those that the individual feels increases the
   sanctity of their life and their relationship to G-d. As a result,
   there are some Reform Jews who do keep kosher. Also, many Jews keep
   some aspect of the kosher laws, such as not eating pork or shellfish.
   
   Rabbis (and others) sometimes recommend avoiding certain food products
   based on concerns other than kashruth, for example:

     * Environmental (e.g. its manufacture harms the environment more
       than necessary)

     * Religious (e.g. a Jewish-owned bakery selling kosher food, but
       open on the Sabbath)

     * 'Tikun olam' [repairing the world] (e.g. the manufacturer complies
       with the Arab boycott of Israel, or mistreats its employees)
       
   Some rabbis choose not to supervise certain products based on
   considerations of the above sort.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.2: How can I learn about Kashrut? Is there a "Kosher"
         FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The Union of Orthodox Congregations maintains a FAQ at
   http://www.ou.org/kosher/primer.html, which would be a good starting
   point. For Pesach, another good source is the Official Rabbinical
   Assembly Pesach Kashrut Guide at
   http://www.rabbinicalassembly.org/info/pesahguide/index.html. Some
   other good sites include:

     * Why keep kosher? From the National Jewish outreach program
       http://www.njop.org/html/Newsletters_and_articles.html#a3.

     * An Introduction to the Philosophy and Laws of Immersing Vessels
       (traditional). http://www.innernet.org.il/tevilah.htm.

     * The Official Masorti (Israeli Conservative) teshuva on Pesach and
       the use of kitniyot http://www.masorti.org/responsa/kitniyot.html.
       
   Another way to learn is to read some of the books in the reading list
   (Part 2, "Traditional"), and subscribe to some of the periodicals. In
   particular, we recommend the following books:
   
   [Dre59]
          Dresner, Samuel H; Siegel, Seymour. The Jewish Dietary Laws.
          Burning Bush Press, New York. 1959. United Synagogue Book
          Service; 1980. Paperback. ISBN 0-838121-05-5.[Conservative
          authorship. The book presents liberal positions on ingredients,
          wine, cheese, gelatin, swordfish. Among Conservative rabbis,
          the book reflects more lenient views.]
          [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0838121055/socculturejew
          ish/] 
          
   [ForXX]
          Forst, Binyomin. The Laws Of Kashrus. Artscroll Mesorah.
          Hardcover. [A comprehensive exposition of their underlying
          concepts and application]
          [Buy at Artscroll:
          http://www.artscroll.com/linker/socculturejewish/ASIN/LOKH] 
          
   [Gre85]
          Greenberg, Blu. How to Run a Traditional Jewish Household
          Paperback reprint edition (September 1985) Simon & Schuster
          (Paper); 1985; ISBN 0-671602-70-5. Jason Aronson (Hardcover);
          1989; ISBN 0-876688-82-2.
          Paperback: [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0671602705/socculturejew
          ish] ; Hardback: [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0876688822/socculturejew
          ish] 
          
   [Lip88]
          Lipschutz, Yacov. Kashruth: A Comprehensive Background and
          Reference Guide to the Principles of Kashruth (The Artscroll
          Series). Mesorah Publications Ltd.; 1988. Hardcover. ISBN
          0-899065-58-9.
          [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0899065589/socculturejew
          ish/] [Buy at Artscroll:
          http://www.artscroll.com/linker/socculturejewish/ASIN/KASH] 
          
   [Lub89]
          Lubavitch Women's Organization. Body and Soul: A Handbook for
          Kosher Living, Lubavitch Women's Cookbook Pub, NY. 1989. Bloch
          Pub Co; 1997.Paperback. ISBN 0-826602-39-8. [Short introduction
          to kosher basics.]
          [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0826602398/socculturejew
          ish/] 
          
   [Lub90]
          Lubavitch Women's Organization: Blau, Esther; Deitsch, Tzirrel;
          Light, Cherna. Spice and Spirit: Complete Kosher Jewish
          Cookbook. Lubavitch Women's Cookbook Pub, NY, 1990, 1997.
          Hardcover. Reprint edition. ISBN 0-826602-38-X. [Contains
          detailed information about the laws of kashrut and holidays
          from the Lubavitch point of view and thus follows Lubavitch
          customs regarding Kashrut; for non-Lubavitch, use in
          conjunction with other Kashrut references. Lots of traditional
          recipes that tend not to fail, if followed. Good section on
          Passover baking.]
          [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/082660238X/socculturejew
          ish/] 
          
   [Wag00]
          Wagschal, S. The Practical Guide to Kashruth. Philipp Feldheim;
          2000. Hardcover. ISBN 0-873065-61-1.
          [Buy at Amazon:
          http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0873065611/socculturejew
          ish/] 
          
   Also, every Jewish household, if you're at all interested in Kashrus,
   should subscribe to Kashrus Magazine, published by Yeshiva Birkas
   Reuven. For information, contact Kashrus at P.O. Box 204, Brooklyn NY
   11204. You can call (718) 336-8544 for Visa/Mastercard Orders. Email:
   kashrus@aol.com. You can also visit the Kashrus website at
   http://kosherinfo.com.
   
   There are also a large number of Kosher Shopping Opportunities on the
   web, including Kosher Supermarket (http://www.koshersupermarket.com/),
   Wholesaleportal (http://www.wholesaleportal.com/), Kosher Finder
   (http://www.kosherfinder.com/), Kosher Foods Depot
   (http://www.kosherfoodsdepot.com/), Kosher Cornucopia
   (http://www.koshercornucopia.com/), and Kosher Fest
   (http://www.kosherfest.com/).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.3: There are a wide variety of kosher symbols. How do I
         learn who's behind them?

Answer:
   
   Every year, Kashrus Magazine publishes an index to all the Kosher
   symbols and the people behind them. You can reach Kashrus Magazine on
   the net at (<http://www.kosherinfo.com/>).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.4: I'm going to be in (insert city here). How do I find
         the kosher restaurants?

Answer:
   
   Shamash.org maintains a database of restaurants in various cities that
   are kosher. This database may be found at
   http://www.shamash.org/kosher/. The interface provides an easy to use
   search service for the database. There is also a link to a service
   that allows you to download the database to your Palm Pilot. Email
   inquiries on the database may be sent to the Shamash Kosher Restaurant
   Team at kosher@shamash.org.
   
   Some other ideas:
   

     * Call the hotel. Most large hotels, especially the chains, have
       provisions for providing Kosher food, given adequate notice. The
       hotel can tell you what it can provide. It can also provide the
       name of the Mashgiach (kashruth supervisor).

     * If the conference hotel cannot provide the services you require,
       then call another large chain hotel.

     * All hotels have the names of nearby houses of worship--and
       sometimes ones in other parts of town. A call to the hotel will
       always elicit this information, and a call to the congregation may
       get information not obtainable directly from the hotel. This might
       include contacts for minyons that have no shul, but which are
       within easier walking distance of the Hotel. This is also a
       possible source of recommendations for hotels with Kosher catering
       facilities, should the conference hotel not have any. It can also
       be as source of information on the reliability of the Mashgiach,
       if you require this information.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.5: Do I need to have a kosher kitchen and kosher home to
         keep kosher?

Answer:
   
   No, all you have to do is avoid non-kosher food. Preparing kosher food
   in a non-kosher kitchen is possible (this arises when visiting or
   living with relatives who don't keep kosher) but it is much more
   difficult than preparing kosher food in a kosher kitchen.
   
   The practice of keeping kosher in the home, but eating non-kosher food
   outside the home is certainly better than eating non-kosher food all
   the time, but the kosher laws deal with what to eat, not where to eat
   it.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.6: I have heard that Polish Orthodox Jews wait 6 hours
         between eating milchig and fleishig and Dutch Orthodox Jews wait
         about an hour. Why?

Answer:
   
   Both agree that there must be a delay, it's just that the different
   communities came to different conclusions about the length. It's a
   matter of custom.
   
   The delays appear to be based on the elapsed time between two meals in
   the respective societies. (All agreed that they must not be eaten at
   the same meal, and "bentching", i.e. the recitation of birkat
   ha-mazon/Grace After Meals, was considered to be the end of a meal.)
   That is. German Jews wait for three hours, since a mid-afternoon snack
   (about 3 hours after lunch) was common practice among Jews and
   non-Jews in Germany. No such habit existed in Poland or Russia, hence
   six hours. And, you guessed it, a late-afternoon snack one hour before
   dinner is not entirely uncommon in Holland.
   
   One contributor notes that some Dutch Orthodox Jews actually quickly
   bentched (said blessings) after the meat course on Friday night,
   entertained his group for one hour, and then served a dairy dessert
   after asking if anyone objected and being answered in the negative.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.7: Why do Sephardim and Ashkenazim have different customs
         regarding permissible foods on Pesach (Passover)?

Answer:
   
   Both agree that Chometz products are forbidden. Ashkenazi authorities
   additionally forbade kitniyos [some legumes], a class of foods in some
   ways similar to chometz, but not classified as "chometz." Sephardic
   authorities didn't consider this stringency to be necessary.
   
   All the minhagims of today are civilisation consequences. For
   instance, in Babel (also all the Arabic penninsula), the rice was and
   is the base of the food (as wheat is in other countries). The rice by
   itself and other dry vegetables are not prohibited by the halacha in
   any cases. As the Ashkenasii lived in rich vegetable country, by
   houmra, they put away the safec of broken parts in rice and others.
   
   In Morroco, three kinds of minhagims are kept:
    1. Toshavim (living in Morroco more than 2000 years) have the same
       minhagims as Ashkenasims. Morroco is very rich in wheat and
       vegetables, and only in years of famine they allowed kitniyots.
       They also affirm that fresh vegetable can't create mahmetset like
       broad bean.
    2. Megourashim (from Spain and Portugal 500 years ago) eating some
       and some not like chickpeas, they affirm that the name in
       Judeo-Arabic hems and hames (instead of Chametz) didn't make them
       non kosher.
    3. Megourashim like above with the same minhagims like Toshavims.
       
   In Algeria, they split in two parts:
    1. The half part near Morroco has the same minhagims as the Toshavims
    2. The other half has the same minhagims as Tunisia and the Arabic
       peninsula.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.8: I'm a vegetarian health-food proponent. Is kosher food
         healthier?

Answer:
   
   We don't know. Traditional Jews keep kosher because G-d demands it of
   us. However, we wouldn't be at all surprised if something which G-d
   demands would also be good for us.
   
   Note that vegetarian food is not always kosher: there are problems
   with cheese, vinegar, oils, grape jelly, insects, gentile cooking, and
   lots more. (No, we don't mean vegetarians eat insects. But strict
   kashrus requires careful inspection for insects.)
   
   Side note for meat eaters: kosher meat is healthier. USDA standards
   are disgustingly lenient regarding the animal's health. "Sixty
   Minutes" once did an expose on this--many kosher butchers reported a
   large increase in gentile customers. Cold-water plucking helps prevent
   the spread of salmonella bacteria, and meat from diseased animals
   cannot be considered kosher. Kosher slaughter is more humane than
   non-kosher slaughter, as it kills the animal in a painless fashion.
   Although kosher slaughter does not kill the animal instantly, the
   animal passes out from the sudden drop in cranial blood pressure and
   dies in a minute or so. There is no pain.
   
   Some Jews boycott particular foods or manufacturers as a political or
   human rights gesture. However, even if a rabbi declares a food
   prohibited in his community, although it is equally as forbidden as
   non-kosher food, this does not affect its kosher status. (For example,
   utensils coming in contact with morally-forbidden products do not
   become non-kosher.)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 6.9: Is vegetarianism kosher?

Answer:
   
   In principle, vegetarianism is compatible with Judaism. In fact, there
   are those who find reasons within Jewish thought supporting
   vegetarianism. However, Judaism categorically rejects the radical
   animal rights position that animals have the same rights as people. It
   should also be kept in mind that, in traditional circles at least,
   vegetarianism may be considered somewhat "strange".
   
   From the traditional viewpoint, vegetarianism for anything other than
   health reasons is not supported, for the following reasons:

     * "Ethical Vegetarianism" is rejected because it is G-d who allows
       us to eat animals. The laws of shechita (ritual slaughter) are
       designed to provide a compassionate way to kill the animals for
       eating.

     * Eating animals actually elevates the animal. In traditional
       thought, animals can only do so much. When a jew makes a blessing,
       eats animal products, and then uses that energy to do mitzvos,
       (s)he is elevating the animal to G-dliness in a way that the
       animal could not do itself. This is considered to be a holy
       endeavor, and is further detailed in the concepts of chassidus.

     * The torah states that "eating meat and drinking wine give a man
       pleasure." All festive and holiday meals have both components:
       they bring us gladness and enhance our simcha. One approach to
       addressing this is to save eating animal products for Shabbat and
       holidays, and eat pareve during the week.
       
   Non-traditional movements do hold with the notion of "Ethcial
   Kashrut". Gates of Mitzvah, the Reform guide to Mitzvot, notes: "One
   might opt to eat only kosher meat or even to adopt some form of
   vegetarianism so as to avoid the necessity of taking a life. (This
   would be in consonance with the principle of tsa-ar baalei
   chayim--prevention of cruelty to animals.)"
   
   According to most halachic authorities, when the Temple is rebuilt,
   all Jewish men will be obligated to partake of the paschal lamb with
   their families. Nothing short of a severe lamb allergy permits
   abstaining from this sacrificial meal (of course, it is believed that
   when the Temple is built, God will heal the sick, so the allergies
   will go away). There are various positions on this issue, which have
   been written about in Kashrus magazine and on the net. Consult your
   local rabbi for details.
   
   Note that, while Judaism defines animals as below humans and does not
   give animals the same rights as people, it does take very strong
   pro-animal stance. Animals must be treated with care and respect;
   recall that the Torah says that a hungry animal must be fed before its
   master.
   
   c - lastly, in regards to the consuming of the paschal lamb when the
   temple is rebuilt, you state that: "Nothing short of a severe lamb
   allergy permits abstaining from this sacrificial meal" however, i wish
   to point out, that when moshiach arrives (may it be immediately!!) all
   people will be healed from their various afflictions - allergies
   included!

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 7.1: What is the Jewish Sabbath and why is it on Saturday?

Answer:
   
   The Sabbath/Shabbat/Shabbos/Shabbath is the seventh day of the week.
   It begins around sunset Friday night and ends around nightfall
   Saturday night. In some Western languages the word for "Saturday"
   means "The Sabbath", such as "el Sa'bado" in Spanish.
   
   The Sabbath commemorates G-d's refraining from continuing creation on
   account of the world being "complete." We emulate this by refraining
   from various categories of "creative work," such as starting a fire,
   building items, and ploughing fields, and lots of smaller-scale
   activities related to these. However, Sabbath meals are festive and
   song-filled, Torah learning is encouraged, and married couples are
   encouraged to reconsummate their union. The idea is to refrain from
   weekday activity in order to devote the day to sacred matters.
   
   The laws of Shabbat are extremely complicated, and the various
   movements differ considerably concerning which activities are
   permissible and which activities are encouraged. A popular thumbnail
   sketch is The Sabbath by Dayan I. Grunfeld.
   
   The Jewish Sabbath is on Saturday because of the passage in Torah
   (Bereishis [Genesis] 2:1-3) that describes how G-d rested on the
   seventh day and how we are commanded to similarly rest (see Sh'mot
   [Exodus] 16:28-30, 23:12, 31:12-17, and others).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 7.2: Why do my Orthodox Jewish friends leave work early on
         Fridays and before Jewish holidays?

Answer:
   
   First, all Sabbath-observant and holiday-observant Jews do this, not
   just Orthodox.
   
   The Jewish "day" begins at sunset and continues to the following
   sunset. Thus Shabbos observance begins before sunset on Friday.
   (generally 18 minutes, sometimes more depending upon local custom)
   Since activities such as cooking, driving a car, etc. are forbidden on
   Shabbat, one must arrive home and finish the preparations (including
   showering, changing clothes) sufficiently early to light the candles
   and go to shul before sunset. In the winter sunset comes early, so
   Shabbat observers have to leave work early. They arrange with their
   management to make up the time by working extra hours other days or by
   coming in early on Friday to make up for leaving early.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 7.3: Why can't Jews use electrical appliances and motor
         vehicles on Shabbat?

Answer:
   
   Jews that closely follow traditional practice don't do a whole
   category of activities, known in Hebrew as Melacha, on Shabbat.
   Melacha is usually badly translated as "work"; but it is better to use
   the Hebrew word, because the English word carries connotations of hard
   labor and other concepts that are inappropriate. Technically, there
   are 39 supercategories of melacha. They are derived from the classes
   of activities performed during the construction of the Mishkan
   (Tabernacle) in the desert, following the exodus from Egypt.
   
   One of the prohibited forms of melacha is lighting a fire. So Jews
   that closely follow traditional practice do not light fires on the
   Sabbath. (In fact it is traditional to light candles just before the
   Sabbath comes in as the last act of melacha done before the Sabbath
   descends). Now, when you drive a car, and you put your foot on the
   ignition, you produce a spark of fire. Thus, such Jews also do not use
   motor vehicles on the Sabbath, for it violates the prohibition against
   lighting fire on Shabbat. Electricity is more complicated (there being
   long arguments about whether it is fire, or whether it is only banned
   for falling under one of the other heads), but without getting into
   the detail, suffice to say that it is not used because it too falls
   within the various prohibitions.
   
   However, different movements have different positions on the issue.
   Reform Jews, and other Progressive ("progressive" is the term used for
   Reform Judaism outside the United States) movements tend not be
   concerned with Melacha at all.
   
   The position of Conservative Judaism is more complicated, as it
   attempts to reconcile modernity with traditional practice, working
   within what it views as halachic process. Some in Conservative Judaism
   hold that electricity is not a form of fire, nor does the use of
   electricity inherently violate any other Shabbat prohibitions. Thus,
   it is an acceptable opinion within the Conservative movement for
   electric lights, telephones and other electrical appliances to be used
   on Shabbat. Note that other prohibitions, such as the prohibition of
   cooking, remain. Others in the movement follow the traditional
   practices seen in Orthodoxy, and restrict the use of electricity in
   addition to other prohibitions.
   
   In the area of driving on Shabbat, the actual stance of the
   Conservative movement is stated in "Travel on the Sabbath: A statement
   unanimously adopted by the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards"
   which was affirmed unanimously on 2/17/60.
   
   This statement indicates that "the Sabbath cannot function as the
   great day of the Lord unless we consciously "make a fence around it".
   The most important of the fences we must make to safeguard the Sabbath
   as an oasis of peace and of holiness is the avoidance of travel."
   However, Conservative Judaism exempts a specific type of travel from
   the above limitation: travel to a synagogue for attendance at worship.
   This exemption was granted based both on the needs of modern
   conditions, were people live in widely scattered areas, as well as a
   view that it was an emergency measure which the individual might make
   when in his conscience he or she knows that no alternative exists,
   stressing the values that would be lost by travel even in such
   instance. Note that both opinions limit this exemption to the need of
   reaching the synagogue for attendance at worship. Still prohibited is
   travel for other ends, such as travel for social purposes, or travel
   to the synagogue for purposes other than to worship (for example, in
   order to attend a Bar Mitzvah ceremony or reception, for the
   motivation here is not the service of God but the honor of man).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.1: What role do women play in Judaism?

Answer:
   
   The basic answer is that everything that G-d created serves a unique
   and vital role in fulfilling G-d's goals for this world/universe. In
   particular, humanity (man and woman, gentile and jew) is both the
   pinnacle and purpose for the creation in the first place. The details
   of how/if women's roles differ from men's in achieving these goals in
   the various Jewish movements is discussed in the remainder of this
   section.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.2: What is the Conservative view of the role of women in
         Judaism?

Answer:
   The past 30 years have seen a revolution in how Conservative Judaism
   views women. Conservative Judaism believes in the equality of men and
   women, and, where necessary, has produced responsa and innovative
   rituals to address religious needs in this area. The Committee on
   Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) has approved a number of responsa that
   deal with the role of women in Jewish law. In all of the areas listed
   below, responsa exist that halakhically justify women's active
   participation in synagogue life:

     * Publicly reading the Torah (ba'al kriah)

     * Being part of the minyan

     * Being called to the Torah (aliyah)

     * Serving as cantor (shalich tzibbur)

     * Serving as rabbi and halakhic decisor (posek)

     * Wearing a tallit and tefillin
       
   Note that a congregational rabbi may or may not decide to adopt
   particular rulings for the congregation. So some Conservative
   congregations will be more or less egalitarian than others.
   
   However, there are other areas where differences remain between men
   and women, including:

     * Matrilineal descent. The child of a Jewish mother is born Jewish;
       the child of a Jewish father is born Jewish if and only if the
       mother is Jewish.

     * Serving as Witnesses. Women do not usually serve as legal
       witnesses in those cases where Jewish law requires two witnesses.
       One opinion of the CJLS affirms that women may serve as witnesses.
       However, most Conservative rabbis currently affirm this only as a
       theoretical option, because of concern for Jewish unity. A change
       could result in many Orthodox Jews refusing to recognize the
       legitimacy of many marriages and divorces. A current Conservative
       solution is in the area of weddings: A new minhag is to use
       Ketubot (wedding document) with spaces for four witnesses to sign;
       two men, and two women.

     * First and Second Aliyot. One position of the CJLS is that
       daughters of Kohanim and Leviym can be accorded the same aliyot
       that are normally accorded to Kohanim and Leviyim, whether they
       are single or married. Their status regarding being called to the
       Torah should not be determined by the lineage of their husbands,
       but by their own paternal lineage. [Rabbi Joel Roth "The status of
       daughters of Kohanim and Leviyim for aliyot" 11/15/89] Another
       position the CJLS is that women do not receive such aliyot. The
       Va'ad Halakha of the Masorti movement has also ruled that women do
       not receive such aliyot. [Rabbi Robert Harris, 5748].

     * Pidyon Haben. There is precedent, though not with unanimity, in
       the halakhah for a Bat Kohen to serve equally with other Kohanim
       with respect to Pidyon ha-Ben. There is strong opinion in the
       Talmud supported by later authorities that she may receive some of
       the priestly dues designated for Kohanim. Even when married to a
       non-Kohen, she does not become a zarah like her husband, but
       retains certain kehuna privileges. Women may thus perform Pidyon
       ha-Ben. [Rabbi Aaron Blumenthal, 1977]. Rabbi Joel Roth notes that
       Rishonim (rabbis from the 10th to 16th centuries) are divided on
       this issue, and cautions that this issue requires more detailed
       study. [1989]

     * Pidyon Habat. Conservative Judaism prohibits performing Pidyon
       Ha-Bat on a newborn daughter. Pidyon Ha-Bat is a newly proposed
       ceremony that would mark the redemption of a newborn daughter; the
       CJLS has stated that this particular ceremony should not be
       performed. Other means, such as a Simchat Bat, should instead be
       used to mark the special status of a new born daughter. [CJLS
       teshuvah by Rabbi Gerald C. Skolnik, 1993]

     * Nesiat Kapayim [The Priestly Blessing]. The CJLS has approved two
       positions on whether women may participate in Nesiat Kapayim. The
       Va'ad Halakha of the Masorti movement has approved one position.
         1. A Bat Kohen may participate in Nesiat Kapayim because: (a)
            The word "banav" in Numbers 66:23 does not mean sons only,
            but rather children. (b) The role of the Kohen is either to
            serve as the medium for God's blessing to israel, or to pray
            for Israel to be blessed--either purpose is appropriate for a
            Bat Kohen who possesses lineal sanctity. (c) Nesiat Kapayim
            is not de'oreita. (d) There has been a steady development of
            this ritual since Temple times, and there is no reason for
            the development to stop. (e) A Bat Kohen is permitted to
            receive other special honors accorded to Kohanim, including
            Birkat Hamazon and Pidyon Haben. [Rabbi Mayer Rabinowitz,
            1994]
         2. A Bat Kohen is not permitted to participate in Nesiat Kapayim
            because as a continuation of a Temple ritual, the Priestly
            Benediction should be performed by those who were
            authentically eligible to do so in the Temple. Women of
            Priestly descent may benefit from the perquisities of
            Kehunah, but they are excluded by the Torah from peforming
            the rituals of the Kohanim in the Temple. Therefore, this
            should only be peformed by male Kohanim. [Rabbis Stanley
            Bramnick and Judah Kagen, 1994]. The Va'ad halakha of the
            Masorti movement, in a teshuvah by Rabbi Reuven Hammer, 5748,
            also states this position.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.3: What is the Reform view of the role of women in
         Judaism?

Answer:
   
   Reform believes in the equality of men and women, and, where
   necessary, has introduced alternative mitzvot and rituals to address
   religious needs in this fashion. Reform allows women to be both rabbis
   and cantors, counts them as part of the minyon (quorum for public
   prayer), allows women to initiate a divorce, and provides a
   berit-equivalent ceremony for girls (no medical procedure is done,
   however).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.4: What is the Orthodox view of the role of women in
         Judaism?

Answer:
   
   The role of women in Orthodox Jewish life, like the role of men, is a
   complex and dynamic product of the myriad components of life. In
   Orthodox Jewish thought, religious observance encompasses a broad
   spectrum of areas including but not limited to observance of the
   Sabbath and dietary laws, contemplation, social interaction, personal
   development, business practice and charity. The role of the Jewish
   woman involves all of these areas as well as many others.
   
   These general components of the role of the Jewish woman are constant
   throughout history. However, the particular manifestations of these
   components differ from era to era and person to person. Jewish law
   does not regulate every detail of life, but provides a basic structure
   within which each person may express their own personality.
   
   Throughout the centuries, the occupations of wife and mother have been
   primary vehicles of religious expression and duty for Jewish women.
   Indeed, throughout history, the vast majority of women of all cultures
   and religions have focused their energies on these roles. While debate
   rages throughout contemporary society as to the origin and benefit of
   these roles for women, it is widely recognized throughout the Orthodox
   Jewish world that the roles of wife and mother afford tremendous
   opportunity for spiritual expression and growth. Home-life in Orthodox
   Judaism is a rich world of familial love, nurturing of others, prayer,
   intellect, and communal festivity. One could argue that it is a far
   more interesting and spiritually satisfying world than the corporate
   work-environment. Nevertheless, contrary to popular belief, women are
   not forbidden to hold jobs. Again, Torah law does not micro-manage
   people's lives. Torah philosophy does emphasize that occupations for
   material acquisition be secondary to higher religious activities such
   as family-life, prayer, and charity, but this principle applies to men
   as well as to women.
   
   According to many classical Torah authorities, women are not required
   to get married. A woman could find a place in Orthodox Judaism without
   involvement in the roles of wife and mother. Nevertheless, the vast
   majority of Orthodox Jewish women in our times find these roles
   central to their divine service. The exact degree of centrality and
   manner of expression will differ from woman to woman. But it is
   recognized in Torah thought in general that dedication to others is a
   virtue. Family-life is an ideal setting for such dedication since the
   personal lives of family members overlap in myriad ways.
   
   Thus, the role of the Jewish woman is not easily defined, as it will
   assume different forms as each woman develops herself in accordance
   with the general parameters of Jewish law and philosophy.
   
   Many, when looking at this issue, have trouble reconciling it with
   egalitarian positions where women are viewed as having equal rights.
   When exploring the Orthodox view, there is an important distinction to
   be made: rights vs. obligations. Traditional Judaism looks at actions
   in terms of duties and obligations, not the modern socio-political
   notions of rights. Thus, in Traditional Judaism, men and women have
   different duties and obligations; the question of rights never arises.
   
   You can find more on this subject in the book Male and Female He
   Created Them from Targum/Feldheim.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.5: Is it true that Orthodox men bless G-d every morning
         for not making them a woman? What do you mean, this isn't terrible?

Answer:
   
   First, note that in some Orthodox prayer rites, the blessings are
   phrased differently. For example, in the Italian Rite (nusach Italki):

     * "...shelo asani goy" (who did not create me a non-Jew) becomes
       "...she-asani Yisrael" (who made me a Jew)

     * "...shelo asani eved" (who did not make me a slave) becomes
       "...she-asani ben-chorin" (who made me a freeman)

     * "...shelo asani isha" (who did not make me a woman) becomes
       "...she-asani gaver" (who made me a man/gentleman)
       
   However, in many common rites, Orthodox men do bless G-d for not
   making them a women. However, there is a reason for doing this, and
   the reason is consistant with the Orthodox attitude towards life. It
   might not fit with today's egalitarian notions, but Orthodoxy does not
   claim to be egalitarian.
   
   First, recall (as was mentioned in Section 8.4) that Orthodox Jews
   think in terms of obligations and duties. In the Orthodox context,
   being obligated to do more duties (mitzvot) is "a good thing", for it
   provides one the opportunity to better fulfill G-d's desires.
   
   With that in mind, consider the blessings said every morning by
   Orthodox Jewish men. Among these blessings are three that go "Blessed
   art You, L-rd our G-d, King of the Universe, who has not made me a
   ...", where "..." is "gentile" (non-Jew),"slave","woman", in that
   order.
   
   Go back to the original reference in the Talmud (Berachos 60b). The
   sequence of three "who has not made me a" blessings was originally
   proposed by one rabbi as gentile/idiot/woman. The other rabbis could
   not comprehend this. It made no sense. And then it was noticed that if
   "idiot" was replaced with "slave", the three blessings fit into a neat
   logical pattern, with the blessings carrying a progression of greater
   yoke of commandments (obligations, duties). It is for the chance to do
   more mitzvos than gentiles/slaves/women that Orthodox men bless G-d
   every morning.
   
   Is this upsetting? Orthodox Jews have a very hard time comprehending
   why anyone would react. After all, men are men, women are women, and
   if the men happen to be glad that they are not women, what of it?
   
   Is this derogatory? What makes you think any mention of differences
   between men and women is secret code for "men good, women bad"? It
   just isn't so, and 2000 years of language/culture/social change have
   given never-intended meanings to innumerable phrases. The above
   misreading of the blessing is one such. Note that if derogatory intent
   were meant, nothing would have prevented it from being expressed. And
   no one would have changed "idiot".
   
   Basically, these blessings can be viewed as thanking G-d for
   obligating the observance of so many mitzvot.
   
   Does Orthodox Judaism think men are superior because they have more
   obligations? Rabbi Aharon Soloveichik, one of Orthodox Judaism's
   foremost halachic authorities, addresses this question in his book
   Logic of the Heart, Logic of the Mind. His key points are:
    1. Whatever is superior was created later. In the human species, the
       female gender was created later, showing that women have innate
       spiritual advantages as compared with men. The question then
       becomes: what is the nature of those advantages?
    2. The gifts that G-d gave to humanity are two: "One blessing is the
       gift of conquest, of power and of grasping (in Hebrew: "kibbush").
       The other is the gift of cultivation, of work and dedication and
       of reaching unto things and people through love, consideration,
       and guidance ("chazakah"). We can attain great heights through
       kibbush, but we can't succeed in establishing a Paradise on earth
       unless we couple it with chazakah.
       The gift of kibbush was bestowed upon men, and to be exercised by
       the males of the eleven tribes excluding Levi. The mandate of the
       woman is that of chazakah.
    3. He goes on to describe why women are exempted from obligatory
       mitzvos created by a time element, from Torah study, and the
       meaning of the morning blessing.
       G-d imposed more mitzvos upon men to limit their natural
       predisposition towards excessive and abusive kibbush. If not
       tempered, this abundance of male energy can be destructive.
       Women don't need such restrictions. As per the brachah (blessing)
       that they recite: "She'asani kirtzono -- Who has made me according
       to His will." Women's innate qualities as the last created
       creature (Rabbi Soloveichik words this as "the crown of
       Creation"), are already aimed at the fulfillment of G-d's ultimate
       desire for mankind. What is that desire? In the time of the
       Messiah, there will be no pursuit of kibbush, rather everyone will
       pursue the gift of chazakah. So women's Divine endowment and her
       mandate to be true to that endowment is consonant with humanity's
       spiritual and moral goals in the Messianic Era.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.6: I've heard polygamy is permissible among Sephardic and
         Yemenite Jews. Doesn't Judaism mandate monogamy?

Answer:
   
   Technically, Polygamy is permitted among non-Ashkenazi (non-Northern
   European tradition) Jews. It is also technically permitted for
   Ashkenazi Jews who obtain special permission of 100 rabbis (as in the
   case of (G-d forbid) a wife who becomes incapacitated). However, this
   is largely an academic question, because:

     * Most Jews live in countries that ban polygamy by civil law.

     * Rabenu Gershom issued an edict that banned polygamy.
       
   The Sephardic community in Israel has its own ban on performing
   polygamous marriages in Israel. The Yemenites (who are also Sepharidm)
   didn't accept the edicts, and continued to have more than one wife. In
   Israel, some Yemenites who came with more than one wife, still have
   them (including the last wave of immigration).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.7: What does clean/unclean refer to?

Answer:
   
   The issue of "clean" and "unclean" usually refers to a discussion of
   the Jewish Laws relating to sexual relations. These laws are known
   collectively as toharat ha'mishpacha, family purity. These rules
   inform us that a women enters the state of "tameh" when she is
   "niddah" (menstruating). During this time the couple must refrain from
   all physical contact, especially sexual relations. After the cessation
   of her menstrual flow, the women counts seven days before immersing
   herself in a mikva, at which time sexual relations between man and
   wife can then continue.
   
   This brings us to the subject of "tahor" and "tameh". Translating them
   as "clean" and "unclean" (or "pure" and "impure") is erroneous. These
   terms actually have nothing to do with physical cleanliness. Rather,
   they describe a state of ritual applicability in regards to fulfilling
   certain mitzvot, such as those associated with the Temple in
   Jerusalem, the cultic function of Kohanim (priests), or sexual
   relations within in a Jewish marriage. Thus, Tahor and Taharah
   actually mean "ritually pure" and Tamae and Tumah mean "ritually
   impure".
   
   Conservative Judaism teaches that the laws of Tohorot HaMishpacha are
   binding. The movement's official stance is defined in detail in Rabbi
   Issac Klein's "A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice". There is one
   notable difference between Orthodox and Conservative Judaism in this
   area: Some Conservative Jews note that the extra waiting period of
   seven days is not a Torah or Talmud requirement. It was initially
   discussed as a custom of the pious, and it was only later that this
   stringency was made mandatory. While the Conservative movement has not
   yet issued an official ruling in this regard, some American
   Conservative halakhic experts have individually written teshuvot
   (responsa) that these extra days are a chumra (stringency) and thus
   not mandatory. Instead, they say that a couple must abstain while a
   woman is niddah, but only have to wait one extra day before immersion
   in a mikveh - not an entire week. These rabbis include Joel Roth,
   Michael Gold, Susan Grossman and Talmud Professor Dr. David C.
   Kraemer.
   
   In recent years, there has been some increase in interest among
   younger Reform and Reconstructionist Jews in the area of toharat
   ha'mishpacha, family purity. While until recently the Reform movement
   had been fairly hostile to both the rituals of and philosophy behind
   toharat ha'mishpacha, the last couple of decades have seen a slow but
   steady turn towards traditional practices, often with new
   interpretations. Some of the younger American Reform rabbis are in
   fact moving for the Reform movement to officially reclaim this
   practice in an official manner.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 8.8: I've heard that Orthodox men can't touch women. Is
         this true?

Answer:
   
   First, let's look at the obligations that the Torah places on men:

     * They are not to have sex with their wife while she is
       menstruating, and for a specific period after the menstruation
       ceases and the birth of a child. During the menstruation period
       and similarly related prohibited periods, the wife is said to be
       "niddah".

     * They are not to commit sexual transgressions, that is, have sex
       out of marriage or commit adultery.
       
   Given these obligations, the Talmud has a number of restrictions to
   prevent men from being led into these situations:
    1. A man and his woman are not allowed to touch, if they are neither
       related nor married. This is because of the fear that touching
       might lead to sexual transgressions. As an extension of this,
       Orthodox men aren't supposed to sit next to women to which they
       are neither related nor married.
    2. A husband and wife may not touch if the woman is menstruating, or
       for a specified period after menstruation/childbirth (the length
       of the period varies depending on the sex of the child). This is
       because they are forbidden to have sex during this time, and the
       thought is that if the husband and wife touch in any way, they may
       be too strongly tempted.
       Hence, during "niddah" (the time of the women's menstrual flow),
       additional restrictions are in place. These extra stringencies
       apply because the couple is already intimate; presumably, it
       doesn't take much to lead to "the act". These stringencies
       include:

          + They cannot touch (even indirectly using an intermediate
            object).

          + They cannot handle an object at the same time.

          + They cannot sit together on an object that moves (a swing
            etc..).

          + They cannot eat from the same plate.

          + They cannot serve food to each other.

          + They must sleep in separate beds.

          + They may not engage in flirtatious behavior.

          + Although spouses must continue to dress attractively, they
            cannot dress provacatively.

          + They should cover parts of the body that are normally
            uncovered only in front of their spouse.

          + They should not wear perfume, cologne, etc.
       The only exception to these restrictions is pikuach nefesh (to
       save a life). More information can be found in Secret of Jewish
       Femininity.
       As a result of this, many couples that observe these laws sleep on
       twin beds (pushed together during non-Niddah periods and during
       the day, so as not to make the status public). Sometimes, "fences"
       are used, such as one partner putting down something so the other
       can pick it up.
    3. Men and women shouldn't be mixed during prayer. This is because
       the presence of the opposite sex is thought to be distracting
       during prayer. Additionally, a person ought to pray from an
       orientation of aloneness, as opposed to completeness.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.26 07:17


End of SCJ FAQ Part 4 (Observance and Women) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:14 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yn-000OVeC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:13 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05147
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:53 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id E73607A12A
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:17 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 8C1F97A14D
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:10 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28095 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:35 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:35 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032535.28094.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 05-Worship
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 96770
Lines: 1988

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Worship, Conversion, Intermarriage (5/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.5>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/05-Worship
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Questions about Worship, Conversion, Intermarriage, Miscellaneous Practice
Message-ID: <faq.5_970423630@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/05-Worship
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.05-Worship
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
   Part 5: Worship, Conversion, Intermarriage, and other Practice Questions
                    [Last Post: Sun Oct  1 11:07:18 US/Pacific 2000]


   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:


                                 Section 9:
                               Jewish Worship
                                      
    1. How does a rabbi differ from a priest? 
    2. Do you need a rabbi for a wedding? 
    3. Do you need a rabbi for a divorce? 
    4. How do Jews pray? 
    5. Is there a distinctly Jewish form of meditation? 
    6. Does Judaism have a strong tradition of religious art and music? 

                                Section 10:
               Conversion, Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"
                                      
    1. Does Halacha (Jewish law) permit intermarriage? 
    2. I'm a Jew who married a gentile. Am I still Jewish? 
    3. I'm a Jew who accepted the tenets of another religion, but now
       wants to practice Judaism again. Am I allowed? Am I still Jewish? 
    4. OK, then apart from halachic considerations, why do many Jews of
       all types oppose intermarriage? 
    5. Is objection to intermarriage a form of bigotry? 
    6. But I still want to intermarry? Do you know of a Rabbi that
       performs intermarriages? 
    7. How does one convert? 
    8. What about adults who are not circumcised? 
    9. What does the word "Jew" mean? 
   10. Who is a Jew? 
   11. I've heard that Jewish parents consider an intermarried child as
       "dead". Is this true? 

                                Section 11:
                      Miscellaneous Practice Questions
                                      
   11.1. Dress 
    1. Why do some Jewish women wear wigs or cover their hair with a
       snood, beret, tichel, turban, kerchief or hat? 
    2. Why do many Jewish men wear head coverings (variously referred to
       as "yarmulkas," "skullcaps," and "kipot")? 
    3. What is a Tallis? Tzit-tzit(those fringes)? Why do Jews wear them?
    4. What are those black boxes and leather straps Jewish men wear? 
    5. Why do many Jewish men sport beards? 
    6. Why do some Orthodox Jews, especially Chassidim, wear a
       distinctive style of clothing (i.e., fur hats, black coats,
       gartel)? 
    7. What is Shaatnez? 
    8. Are there any special dress rules or customs for women? 
       
   11.2 Sex and Purity
    1. What's this I've heard about a hole in a sheet? 
    2. Can a Jewish man only uncover his wife a hands-breadth? 
    3. What is a "mikveh"? 
       
   11.3 Writing 
    1. Why do some people write "G-d" with a hyphen instead of an `o'? 
    2. Why do some Jews write "J-s-s" and "Xianity?" 
       
   11.4 Practices towards others
    1. Does Judaism permit slavery? 
    2. What does "eye for an eye" mean? 
       
   11.5 Weddings
    1. Why is the glass broken at Jewish weddings?
    2. What is a Ketubah?
    3. What are some other common Jewish wedding customs?
    4. What should I wear to a Jewish wedding?
       
   11.6 Death and Burial
    1. Is it true that someone with tattoos cannot be buried in a Jewish
       cemetery? 
    2. I've heard about a custom of putting stones on the grave. Do you
       know where this custom originated? 
       
   11.7 Charity
    1. What are the levels of giving?


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 9.1: How does a rabbi differ from a priest?

Answer:
   
   A rabbi has no actual powers in the written Torah, although the Talmud
   does provide the Rabbi with the authority to make interpretations of
   Torah (which, in Orthodoxy, provides authority). Rabbis are, however,
   ordained (a term used in the progressive communities) or given
   semichah. This is a recognition of a certain level of training or
   education as defined as appropriate for the community in which the
   Rabbi has studied.
   
   One of the traditional names for semichah is hatarat hora'ah, which
   translates as a license to instruct. In the Orthodox community,
   semichah is granted in two forms: Yoreh Yoreh (to instruct) and Yadin
   Yadin (a higher level, meaning to judge). This was seen in earlier
   times. For example there was the "Magid" or preacher (the role of
   teaching Jewish law and judging being separated from moral
   instruction).
   
   Because of the rabbi's training, the rabbi often takes on other roles.
   Rabbinical presence at religious services is desired insofar as
   everyone likes the rabbi and the rabbi can rule on questions that come
   up related to the service (e.g. does a particular smudge render a
   Torah scroll unkosher?) If the rabbi has a nice voice, and no one else
   has priority, the rabbi may even lead the services. The state gives
   rabbis the permission to perform weddings and so on since the state
   trusts them.
   
   Priests are male descendants from Aaron, the brother of Moses. They
   are usually called cohanim [cohen singular]. The cohanim perform
   Birkat Cohanim (blessing the congregation using the Hebrew text found
   in Bamidbar [Numbers] 6:23-25) on the following occasions:
   Daily
          ...in Israel (except the Galil, per Minhag Tzefat)
   Shabbat and Yom Tov
          ...in many non-Israeli Sephardic congregations
   Yom Tov 
          ...otherwise (non-Israeli Ashkenazic congregations)
          
   Cohanim are traditionally granted priority in numerous details. They
   are also traditionally forbidden to attend funerals other than their
   closest relatives and may not marry divorcees or converts. When the
   Temple is standing, the cohanim run most of the Temple service.
   
   The "Star Trek" Vulcan "live long and prosper" sign is roughly
   one-half of the gesture the cohanim make when blessing the
   congregation.1 You can see it engraved on many cohen tombstones:
\\//_ _\\//
 \ /   \ /

   The Pharisee/Sadduccee conflict was a sectarian division in the period
   of the Second Temple, although some view it as a rabbi/priest
   conflict. When the Second Temple was destroyed, the priests lost most
   of their power.
   
   Oh wait, you meant maybe, like Catholic/Anglican priests? Heh.
   
   On this note: Priests are often used as intermediaries between man and
   G-d. Rabbis are nothing more than regular people who have learned much
   Torah. Catholic priests can give absolution for sins, rabbis can't
   (unless you're asking forgiveness for something you've done against
   the rabbi personally).
   
   On the other hand, in the traditions of the Chassids and in the
   Sephardi communities, holy men sometimes have a role as intermediary
   (though not obligatory, of course). The tales of Rabbi Levi Yitzchak
   of Berdichev are filled with stories of his intercession On-High. This
   was a dominant theme in Chasidic "maasehs."
   
   Footnote:
   
   1: The Vulcan's learned of this symbol from Leonard Nimoy, who is
   Jewish.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 9.2: Do you need a rabbi for a wedding?

Answer:
   
   Technically, you don't need one; however, it's very important to have
   a rabbi in order to make sure that the complicated marriage ceremony
   is done properly. Valid witnesses are needed to make the marriage
   official. The criteria constituting a valid witness differ among the
   movements.
   
   The purpose of a rabbi is like that of using a judge or a lawyer in
   civil matters to ensure that the law is complied with. This differs
   from the non-Jewish concept of a minister having some necessary
   mystical connection with G-d that is required to make the ceremony
   valid.
   
   In Israel, the Rav is also needed for the secular legality of the
   wedding.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 9.3: Do you need a rabbi for a divorce?

Answer:
   
   The appropriate answer to this depends on the movement with which you
   are involved, and whether or not you had a "Jewish" wedding. In this
   context, a "Jewish Wedding" is a marriage that was recognized as being
   under the laws of Moses and Israel. Intermarriages, regardless of the
   amount of Judaism practiced in the household or who performed the
   ceremony are not "Jewish" weddings because halacha (traditional Jewish
   law) does not recognize marriages between Jews and non-Jews. There are
   other types of marriages that are not recognized; consult your local
   rabbi for information.
   
   Conservative and Orthodox Judaism require (and Reform recommends) that
   if you have a Jewish wedding, you should get a Jewish divorce, which
   is called a "get". This is because Judaism regards marriage as a
   special relationship between a man and a woman that begins with a holy
   bond. Just as that relationship is created through a religious act of
   marriage, it can only be abrogated through a Jewish act, the "get".
   
   Note that a "get" is required even if you already have a civil divorce
   (with one exception: Reform, but not the other movements, accepts the
   civil divorce papers as equivalent to a "get"). According to Jewish
   law, a marriage is not dissolved until a bill of divorce (get) is
   exchanged between husband and wife. Most Non-Reform American Rabbis,
   and all Rabbis in Israel, will not officiate at a wedding if either
   party has been divorced without the benefit of a get.
   
   Regardless of one's personal convictions or practices, or one's
   movemental affiliation, obtaining a "get" is important. This simple
   procedure does more than just assure the couple that they will be free
   to remarry should they so desire. It also prevents a tragic problem: a
   child born to a Jewish woman whose previous marriage did not terminate
   with a "get" may be considered illegitimate. Any Jew, whether
   observant or non-observant, needs to share in the concern for Jewish
   unity and in providing their children with a clean slate for the
   future.
   
   A Jewish divorce is similar to many present-day legal transactions. A
   divorce contract (get) is drawn up under expert Rabbinical staff
   (consult your local Rabbi to find an appropriate party to do this) and
   signed by witnesses. The husband and wife are not subject to personal
   questions. If they choose to, they need not be present together.
   
   A Jewish divorce usually takes an hour or two, during which time the
   get is prepared and executed. The parties are expected to provide
   proof of identification, and will be asked some formal questions to
   make it clear that the get is being executed on their behalf without
   coercion. Costs may vary in different cases, but on the average, a get
   costs US$350.00.
   
   Note that we should add here that many rabbis will not issue a get
   until the civil divorce has been finalized in order to avoid problems.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 9.4: How do Jews pray?

Answer:
   
   In public and in private; in groups and alone. Jews pray loudly and in
   silence; in Hebrew, English, and any other language you can name.
   Sometimes Jews even pray without language. Jews pray from the depth of
   their souls, at the tops of their lungs, and from the quiet of their
   hearts. It is difficult to point to a specific "Jewish" way of
   praying.
   
   However, one's prayers must fulfill certain daily obligations, so a
   standard order of prayers has been developed to accomplish this.
   Still, even in a structured prayer service, there are many
   opportunities for a silent, personal supplication to G-d.
   
   The introduction to the Artscroll Siddur (Orthodox) provides a good
   overview of the Jewish view of prayer, and the book To Pray as a Jew
   discusses more of the particulars.
   
   The next question is: So, why do we pray at all. Often, when we think
   of 'prayer', we think of needs and requests. This is not necessarily
   the Jewish concept of prayer.
   
   In Judaism, prayer is an introspective process. It is process of
   discovering what one is, what one should be, and how to achieve the
   transformation. Prayer is described in Torah as a service of the
   heart, not of the mouth (Talmud Bavli, Ta'anit 2a). By improving
   ourselves with prayer, we become capable of absorbing G-d's blessing.
   
   The Hebrew word for prayer is tefila, based on the words 'to judge' or
   'to differentiate'. The exercise of judgements is called 'pilelah',
   whose roots mean 'a clear separation'. Prayer is viewed as a means to
   define what truly matters, to ignore the trivialities.
   
   So why pray? Doesn't G-d know our requirements already? In Jewish
   tradition, the purpose of tefila is not to tell G-d something, but
   rather to raise the level of the person praying by improving their
   perceptions of life so they can become worthy of blessing.
   
   Note that Jewish law requires the worshiper to be aware that it is G-d
   being addressed, to "know before Whom you are standing" (Talmud Bavli,
   Berakhot, 28b). Thus, Jewish prayer is more than reading from a prayer
   book. Prayer requires the sense of standing in the presence of G-d and
   the intent to fulfill at least one of G-d's commandments. This intent
   is called kavanah.
   
   Talmud teaches that the minimal level of kavanah required is that "one
   who prays must direct one's heart towards heaven" (Berakhot, 31a). The
   next higher level of kavanah is to know and understand fully the
   meanings of the prayers. The level following that is to free one's
   mind of all extraneous and interfering thoughts. At the highest level,
   kavanah means to think about the deeper meaning of what one is saying
   and praying with extraordinary devotion. Should circumstances make it
   necessary for a person to choose between saying more prayers without
   kavanah or saying fewer prayers with kavanah, the fewer are preferred.
   (Shulkhan Arukh, Orah Hayim 1:4)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 9.5: Is there a distinctly Jewish form of meditation?

Answer:
   
   Yes. Meditation has long been a part of Judaism. Today, there is a
   revival that is discovering the richness of the Jewish meditative
   tradition. Part of this comes from regularity of practice (think of
   this like the repeating of a "mantra" in other cultures, although
   there is much more). Meditation and reconnecting yourself to G-d
   occurs through daily and regular Jewish observances such as daily
   prayer, kashrut (keeping kosher), Shabbat and holydays. The silent
   "shemoneh esrei" prayer is also a form of meditation.
   
   There is much information on Jewish Meditation available on the web:

     * Kavannah. The Kavannah site (www.kavannah.org or
       http://www.crosswinds.net/~kavannah/) provides a collection of
       resources for Jewish Meditation.

     * Jewish Mystical Traditions. Zos Imos has a page on Jewish Mystical
       Traditions at http://www.mnsmc.edu/merton/zos/jewish.html

     * Virtual Yeshiva. Rabbi Rami Shapiro has available a Brief
       Introduction to Jewish Meditation at
       http://www.rasheit.org/VY_SOULCRAFT/slcrmed.html.

     * Chocomat Halev. This organization has an online bibliography
       specifically about Jewish Meditation at
       http://www.chochmat.org/biblio.htm
       
   Readers might also consult Section 4.10 of this FAQ, which contains a
   discussion of [KQ]abbalah. You might also look at some of the books in
   the "mysticism" portion of the reading list.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 9.6: Does Judaism have a strong tradition of religious art
         and music?

Answer:
   
   Emphatically, yes! Cantorial music goes back a long way, and there
   have been Jewish artists since Abraham's time. You should investigate
   many of the exhibits at the local Jewish Community Centers,
   synagogues, and rabbinical schools (such as the Skirball Museum at
   Hebrew Union College in Los Angeles). Often, Jewish art focuses on
   ceremonial objects, such as spice boxes, menorot, mezzuzot, wimples,
   kippahs, breastplates for the Torah, Torah covers, etc, as opposed to
   portraits or statues.
   
   Judaism does have a strong tradition of religious music, it's just
   that there haven't been that many Jewish composers with great popular
   success outside of the small Jewish circles (as opposed to classical
   composers of the 17th-19th centuries who wrote liturgical music that
   was a great success in its own right, without the liturgy underneath
   it)
   
   There is also an emerging tradition of modern Jewish music, including
   such artists as Debbie Friedman, Rabbi Joe Black, and others. Some of
   this music is more appropriate to the liberal streams. Those
   interested in modern Jewish music should investigate some of the
   online Jewish music stores, such as Sounds Write
   (http://www.soundswrite.com/) or JewishMusic.com
   (http://www.jewishmusic.com/).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.1: Does Halacha (Jewish law) permit intermarriage?

Answer:
   
   According to post-Sinaitic Jewish law, a marriage can be contracted
   only between two Jews, so an intermarriage is not recognized as a
   Jewish marriage.
   
   In some countries, the progressive Jewish movements recognize civil
   marriages as Jewishly valid, irrespective of religion.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.2: I'm a Jew who married a gentile. Am I still Jewish?

Answer:
   
   Yes. Marriage doesn't change your status.
   
   With respect to your children, according to Conservative and Orthodox
   Judaism, the children of Jewish mothers are Jewish, and the children
   of gentile women are gentile unless converted. (An adult who converts
   must accept the Obligation of the Commandments at the time of
   conversion. A child who converts delays this acceptance until age 13
   (12 for girls), thereby validating the childhood-conversion. If he
   doesn't accept the commandments, he is not considered Jewish.)
   
   Reform requires that a child born of a mixed marriage identify
   publicly with Judaism (e.g., have a Jewish naming, Brit (if
   appropriate), Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, etc.) to be considered
   Jewish by Reform. This is called the "patrilineal descent" decision.
   
   The liberal Jewish movements (Reform, Progressive) often try to work
   with intermarried couples to encourage them to remain involved in
   Judaism, to raise their children as Jewish (with subsequent formal
   conversion, or to meet the requirements for Reform Judaism), and to
   educate the non-Jewish partner so that Jewish life at home is not
   sabotaged (often, as a side-effect of this, the non-Jewish partner
   makes an independent decision to convert). There is a group that works
   on promoting services to intermarried families, called the Jewish
   Outreach Institute (JOI) <http://www.joi.org/>. Since 1989, this group
   has held several national conferences for Jewish communal
   professionals and lay leaders to foster expertise in programming for
   the nearly 600,000 intermarried families and their more than 700,000
   children in North America. If you are interested in JOI's publications
   or obtaining a directory of services, visit their homepage, write them
   at 1270 Broadway, Suite 609 New York NY 10001; contacted them via
   Email at info@joi.org, or via telephone at +1-212-760-1440.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.3: I'm a Jew who accepted the tenets of another
         religion, but now wants to practice Judaism again. Am I allowed? Am
         I still Jewish?

Answer:
   
   A Jew cannot become a non-Jew. This is because any Jew can do tshuva
   (repentance or "return") up to the moment of death, and this includes
   forsaking one's estrangement from Judaism. The three steps of Teshuvah
   are based on the Rambam.
   
   A Jew who sins (e.g. by joining another religion) may lose the
   privileges of being a Jew (e.g. participation in the Jewish community)
   but at no point does a Jew become a non-Jew. For example, if a
   particular activity is permitted to non-Jews, but forbidden only to
   Jews, it remains a sin for this person.
   
   In Judaism, repentance consists of admitting the sin, regretting that
   one sinned, and resolving not to repeat the sin. In the case of a sin
   that consisted of joining another religion, recanting would certainly
   be involved--one would (in addition to admitting "I believed in X")
   say "I regret that I believed in X" and "I will no longer believe in
   X".
   
   In English, one does not "repent to", one repents. In Hebrew, "to
   repent" and "to return" are the same word. One returns to G-d. But one
   returns to G-d by doing the above three actions.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.4: OK, then apart from halachic considerations, why do
         many Jews of all types oppose intermarriage?

Answer:
   
   Children of intermarriages are statistically less likely to identify
   with Judaism than children raised by Jewish parents, so intermarriage
   weakens the Jewish people. Therefore, Jews across the spectrum oppose
   intermarriage in order to prevent this weakening.
   
   A large part of Jewish observance and identity centers on the home,
   family, and community. Religion is a part of daily life, in areas as
   diverse as making a blessing before wearing new clothes for the first
   time to thanking G-d before and after meals. Special occasions such as
   Shabbat and holidays carry special customs and observances. A home
   made by a Jew and a non-Jew is much less likely to be a "Jewish home".
   Where children are involved, they are most likely to grow up with a
   positive Jewish identity when they see both parents Jewishly
   connected.
   
   Also, for many people, a difference in religion is an added stress on
   a relationship. For this reason, many Jewish parents discourage
   intermarriage in their children in an honest attempt to help their
   children find long-term happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.5: Is objection to intermarriage a form of bigotry?

Answer:
   
   The traditional objection to intermarriage is simply that it is one of
   the 613 Mitzvot (commandments) that a Jew cannot and may not marry a
   non-Jew. Of course one may and should look for reasons for this
   Mitzvah, but the bottom line is that Mitzvot are done because they
   were commanded by G-d.
   
   Is this bigotry? Perhaps. Yet such exclusiveness is common in religion
   -- and not just Judaism. On the other hand, the dictionary definition
   of a bigot is "A person who is rigidly devoted to his own group,
   religion, race, or politics and is intolerant of those who differ."
   Although Jews are devoted to their own group or religion, they are not
   intolerant of the other groups. Rather, the attitude is "live and let
   live", and if one wants to become part of the Jewish community, one
   should join the community.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.6: But I still want to intermarry? Do you know of a
         Rabbi that performs intermarriages?

Answer:
   
   Sigh. As Eliot Shimoff wrote:
   
                    I do not like this thread, it's dead
                      I do not like it, mark it "read"
                                      
                     I could not, would not, on the Net
                      I shall not, must not, on a bet
                         Decimal, octal, or binary
                        It isn't good to intermarry
                                      
                          I would not co-officiate
                      I wouldn't even approve a date!
                          I must not officiate-co
                            Absolutely, NO NO NO
                                      
                     I don't approve of marriage, inter
                      Summer, fall, spring, or winter
                      I know deep down I should hit K
                     Kill this thread, and save the day
                                      
                      I don't approve of intermarriage
                But here is comes, our next net barrage. :-)
                                      
   If you really insist on going through with the intermarriage after
   everything you have read and you are in the United States, Frank F.
   Smith wrote on soc.culture.jewish that you might want to contact The
   Rabbinic Center for Research and Counseling
   (http://www.rcrconline.org/) in Westfield, NJ (908-233-2288 (automated
   message); 908-233-0419 (real person), 908-233-6459 (FAX)). Founded in
   1970, the Rabbinic Center for Research and Counseling is the first
   organization established to promote research on intermarriage and to
   serve the needs of intermarrying and intermarried couples. The
   Rabbinic Center provides a list of rabbis who officiate at
   intermarriages, conducts and promotes research on intermarriage,
   offers premarital and marital therapy for intermarried couples and
   their families, and presents a variety of programs specifically geared
   to the needs of intermarried couples. Their list of rabbis is
   available at http://www.rcrconline.org/rabbi.htm. To obtain the list
   by mail, send your name and address with a check for $20 to the
   Rabbinic Center, 128 East Dudley Avenue, Westfield, New Jersey 07090.
   In addition to the list of over 290 rabbis, you will receive some
   articles on intermarriage and on the programs the Center offers for
   intermarried couples. The list will be sent by return mail. Please add
   $10 if you want the list sent by fax or email and add $20 for Federal
   Express. For telephone information on the List of Rabbis Who Officiate
   at Intermarriages, call (908) 233-2288. Note: All rabbis on the list
   are members either of the Central Conference of American Rabbis or of
   the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association; the list is updated
   monthly, and that some rabbis have conditions under which the
   officiate (such as raising the children as Jewish).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.7: How does one convert?

Answer:
   
   Please Note: Potential converts should be aware that, depending on the
   movement that performs the conversion, other movements may or may not
   recognize their conversion. For example, Orthodox movements do not
   recognize all Reform conversions, most Conservative conversions, and
   even some Orthodox conversions. In general, the more liberal the
   movement, the more accepting it is of other movement's conversions;
   the more orthopractic the convertion, the more acceptable it is more
   movements. However, the question of Jewish status in Israel is
   different. Jews (regardless of affiliation; regardless of conversion
   status) may receive Israeli citizenship under the Law of Return. Once
   in Israel, one's acceptance as a "Jews" is usually up to the Orthodox
   religious authorities, who may or may not regard a non-Orthodox
   conversion as halachically-valid regardless of the affiliation on your
   Israeli identity card.
   
   Conservative and Orthodox Jews require that the potential convert be
   instructed about how to live as a Jew, and undergo kabbalat ol mitzvot
   [agreement to do the commandments], mila [circumcision for men], and
   tevila [immersion in a 'mikvah' ritual bath], and that the procedure
   be supervised by a beit din [court] of three. Note that the members of
   the Bet Din must be acceptable witnesses. According to the Orthodox
   Jewish law, a witness must scrupulously observe all the laws,
   particuarly Shabbat. From an Orthodox standpoint, therefore, any Jew
   who does not follow Orthodox standards of practice--rabbi or
   not--would not be qualified to sit on a Bet Din.
   
   The Reform movement requires that the potential convert agree to
   observe the commandments (according to Reform standards) and
   participate publicly in the community, but they do not require mikva
   or mila. Reform recommends that the potential convert be made aware of
   mikva and mila, and that their conversion would be unacceptable to
   Orthodox Jews, but such notification is not required. In fact, in the
   pamphlet "Becoming a Jew", published by the UAHC/CCAR Commission on
   Reform Jewish Outreach, it says in response to the question "If I
   convert with a Reform rabbi, will all rabbis consider me to be a
   Jew?":
   
     Reform, Reconstructionist, and under certain circumstances,
     Conservative rabbis recognize the validity of conversions performed
     by rabbis of all branches of Judaism. Many Orthodox rabbis,
     however, do not recognize non-Orthodox conversions. Your sponsoring
     rabbi will be able to discuss further any implications of
     conversion under his or her auspices for you.
     
   The Reform portion of the FAQ contains contact information on how to
   start the conversion process.
   
   Conservative rabbis will accept Reform conversions with mila and
   tevila, regardless of the observance level of the beit din, for the
   sake of intergroup harmony.
   
   The debate among movements as to the acceptability of different
   procedures remains unresolved, and is unlikely to ever be resolved
   (and certainly will not be resolved in network discussions). The
   reasons for this depend on from which movement the question is asked.
   And so the reasoning of each movement needs to be stated separately.
   
   Liberal Judaism views this as a question of stringency. Therefore, for
   Liberal Judaism to say "I will comply with the Orthodox standard" is
   to acknowledge an insufficiency of its own standards. Obviously, then,
   non-Orthodox rabbis are unwilling to leave all conversions to the
   Orthodox (even though this may seem like an efficient compromise from
   a practical point of view.) Conversely, for a Orthodox Judaism to say
   "Liberal standards are acceptable" is to acknowledge a superfluity of
   its stricter standards, an equally unlikely scenario.
   
   Orthodox Judaism views this as a question of objective reality. A
   non-Jew does or does not become Jewish by a particular procedure. This
   is in some ways analagous to the procedure by which a person becomes a
   naturalized citizen. Just as the oath of allegiance that the person
   takes to become a citizen is only the end of a process, and only
   certain judges may administer that oath; so to (l'havdil) the Beit
   Din, Tevilah (immersion), and circumcision (if male) are the
   culmination of a process and may only be administered by certain
   rabbis. This is obviously unacceptable to Liberal Judaism, as part of
   the procedure is an understanding and acceptance of the world view of
   Orthodox Judaism.
   
   If you are still interested after reading the above, the following
   will help you start:
    1. First, get in touch with a rabbi in the movement with which you
       wish to associate:

          + Orthodoxy: Consult your local rabbi.

          + Conservative: The Rabbinical Assembly, the organization of
            rabbis affiliated with the Conservative movement in Judaism,
            has established a national hotline to provide free advice,
            information, and literature on the Conservative movement's
            programs for people who wish to convert to Judaism. The
            number in the US is (800) 275-6532 [800 ASK-N-LEARN].

          + Reform: Consult a local Reform rabbi. If you want to talk to
            someone by Email, look at the answer to Section 18.7,
            question 4 in the Reform FAQ. Rabbi Celso Cukierkorn also
            provides conversion support for those in far-flung
            communities interested in Reform conversion; see
            www.conversiontojudaism.com for details.
    2. Second, start reading. A good place to start is the General part
       of the S.C.J reading list, in the section Where do I start?.
    3. Third, you might consider exploring the Conversion Web Site
       (<http://www.convert.org>). This site, run by Dr. Lawrence J.
       Epstein, contains information on conversion to Judaism in a manner
       that hopefully avoids any partisan leanings. USA addresses and
       phone numbers for obtaining information from the Orthodox (RCA),
       Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist movements are provided.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.8: What about adults who are not circumcised?

Answer:
   
   Adult converts must also undergo some form of circumcision. In the
   Orthodox and Conservative movements, actual circumcision is required
   unless, of course, the convert is already circumcised (at which point
   a pinpricking is performed to draw blood, an inherent part of the
   act). In the Reform movement, circumcision for converts is recommended
   but not required.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.9: What does the word "Jew" mean?

Answer:
   
   There are at least two totally distinct meanings of the word Jew.
   
   The one that is germane to most of the issues of SCJ is what might
   best be described as a "member of the Jewish people." The people who
   are generally considered to belong to this group are enumerated under
   the heading "Who is a Jew", below.
   
   Although membership in "Am Yisrael," as we call the Jewish people, is
   determined by religious criteria, these criteria do not include the
   actual practice of Judaism. So Am Yisrael is truly a group of people
   who identify themselves as such, and not just a religion. Some people
   refer to Am Yisrael as a nation.
   
   Because many people have joined Am Yisrael through conversion over the
   years, Jews are not, at this point, a single ethnic group, any more
   than the French people. There are Jews of several different
   ethnicities, as described elsewhere in this FAQ.
   
   Nevertheless, there is an group that, for better or worse, is often
   described as Jews: the descendants of the ancient Hebrews, many of
   whom were dispersed across much of the earth during Roman times. And
   the vast majority of Am Yisrael belong to this group. To avoid
   confusion, we shall refer to this group as "descendants of the ancient
   Hebrews."
   
   It is sometimes unclear whether a frequently asked question about Jews
   refers to Am Yisrael or to the descendants of the ancient Hebrews. We
   shall give separate answers in case of confusion.
   
   In soc.culture.jewish, speaking as a Jew has the implication that one
   is currently Jewish, and not practicing another religion. Hence, a
   person born Jewish but practicing Islam should not write "I'm a Jew
   who accepts Muhammad's prophecy" but rather the more truthful "I'm a
   practicing Muslim of Jewish ancestry." Of course, Jews who practice
   other religions are welcomed and encouraged to return to practicing
   Judaism at any time.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.10: Who is a Jew?

Answer:
   
   You had to ask this question? You really had to ask "who is a Jew?"??
   Come on, couldn't you have asked a hard question, like whether Adam
   had a pippik or not? (pippik means navel, a/k/a 'belly button')
   
   For thousands of years the answer was simply someone born of a Jewish
   mother, or someone who undertook a conversion, which involved
   accepting the yoke of the commandments, an immersion in a mikveh
   [ritual bath], and for men, circumcision, the latter two in the
   presense of witnesses. And then came modern times. Hooboy! You sure
   you aren't interested in Adam's pippik?
   
   Anyway, then came modern times, and along came new answers. First the
   oldtimers complained that the newtimers weren't kosher to do a
   conversion and then the newtimers got newfangled about the yoke and/or
   the immersion and/or the circumcision and boy did the oldtimers really
   got unhappy with this and then the issue got more confusing when the
   Israeli government started guaranteeing automatic citizenship to Jews
   resulting in a play it by ear like no one who takes up other religions
   is accepted but the latest round of yelling was when the newtimers
   started accepting Jewish father and Jewish upbringing and at this
   point we give up and are asking all prospective posters of this
   question to first tell us whether Adam had a pippik.
   
   The only thing that is universally agreed is that the practicing of
   other religions is the same as the rejection of Judaism.
   
   Even within Orthodoxy the answer gets, uh, "flexible" at times. (You
   thought this was just newfangled vs oldfangled? Heh!) When the Nazis
   were trying to figure out whether to murder the Karaites quickly or
   slowly, they asked several Orthodox rabbis if the Karaites were Jewish
   or not. (You figured out the answer? Maybe you belong in yeshiva!)
   Nineteenth century Samaritan massacres by Islamic zealots were stopped
   when they got official word that Samaritans are Jews, i.e., people of
   the book. There have been conflicting answers regarding the Ethiopian
   Jews.
   
   Another bit of Orthodox "flexibility" comes regarding Conservative
   conversions. Such a person (a sofek) is not counted as Jewish for
   anything positive, but is often treated as Jewish for things negative,
   just in case. Thus, a sofek may not be called to the Torah, or even be
   counted for a minyan, but would not be treated as a Shabbos goy. (He
   would be expected to do a divorce in the traditional manner, but this
   shouldn't be a problem, since as a Conservative he holds by that too.)
   Conservatives often act the same towards Reform conversions, and even
   within all three movements, there is often rejection of lenient
   leaning conversions.
   
   Reform Judaism rules that the children of two Jewish parents are
   considered Jewish. Reform also rules that when one parent is Jewish
   and the other gentile, the identity of the child as Jewish must be
   established subsequently through Jewish education and positive Jewish
   acts such as Bar Mitzvah, Confirmation, etc. This is known as the
   "Patrilineal descent" ruling, because it considers the child of a
   Jewish father and gentile mother to be Jewish without a conversion
   ceremony, as opposed to "Matrilineal descent" in which the child of a
   Jewish woman is automatically Jewish, irrespective of paternity or
   subsequent practice. If you want to look at the text of the decision,
   which is a recurring debate topic on S.C.J, it may be found at the URL
   http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/resodisp.pl?file=mm&year=1983.
   
   While countless treatises have been written on this subject, some
   readers recommend the Chabad/Lubavitch booklet "Who is a Jew?" by R'
   J. Immanuel Schochet, available from SIE, 788 Eastern Pkwy, Brooklyn,
   NY 11213.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 10.11: I've heard that Jewish parents consider an
         intermarried child as "dead". Is this true?

Answer:
   
   There are many believe that Judaism teaches that the family must
   consider as dead (and as a result, perform appropriate mourning
   practices such as sitting "shiva") for a child who marries a non-Jew.
   However, it is not clear the anyone does this. It is definitely not
   halacha (Jewish law), nor is it widespread enough to be a custom.
   
   This "legend" arose because, until recently, those who had interfaith
   marriages often abandoned Judaism, becoming apostate Jews. The custom
   of sitting shiva for apostates seems to be based on a misunderstanding
   of a passage in the Or Zarua (13th cent), which stated that Rabbenu
   Gershom (11th cent) sat shiva for his son, who had become a Christian.
   My understanding is that Rabbenu Gershom sat shiva when his son died,
   despite the fact that he had apostasized, not when the son became a
   Christian. The halakhic discussion of this point, which starts in the
   Or Zarua, goes back and forth on whether or not we follow that
   practice, but, there is no suggestion that we should sit shiva when
   someone leaves Judaism.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.1: Dress: Why do some Jewish women wear wigs or cover
         their hair with a snood, beret, tichel, turban, kerchief or hat?

Answer:
   
   Within Orthodoxy, it is considered a breach of modesty for a married
   woman to have uncovered hair while in the presence of men other than
   her husband. Customs differ as to how much hair can be showing beneath
   the head covering, or if a wig is better/worse than a hat of some
   sort.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.2: Dress: Why do many Jewish men wear head coverings
         (variously referred to as "yarmulkas," "skullcaps," and "kipot")?

Answer:
   
   The head covering (for simplicity, we'll call it a kipa (singular of
   kipot), although all the terms refer to approximately the same thing)
   is a sign of humility for men, acknowledging what's "above" us (G-d).
   It's necessary for men to cover their heads during certain prayers
   (whether it be by a kipa or another headcovering), and for one making
   blessings all day, it's inconvenient to keep donning and removing a
   kipa. In some places, the type of kipa and way of wearing it expresses
   affiliation with a particular yeshiva or political viewpoint. In other
   places, it doesn't really matter.
   
   Many Ashkenazi rabbis acknowledge that wearing a head covering at all
   times was once considered an optional "midat chasidut" [pious act] but
   that nowadays, full-time head covering is the norm except under
   extenuating circumstances.
   
   Sephardic communities generally did not have the custom of wearing a
   kipa all the time.
   
   Some diaspora Jews leave off the kipa at school, work, or when
   testifying in court, because of real danger or uneasiness in appearing
   in the secular world with an obvious symbol of Jewishness.
   
   Many non-Orthodox Jews (and some modern Orthodox Jews) do not always
   wear a kipa. This is because some sources make covering the head by a
   Jewish male a special practice of the pious (midat chasidut). However,
   these movements do recognize that it is a Jewish way of showing
   reference and respect, as well as a positive means of identification
   (which can serve as a barrier against assimilation). Some movements
   have specific recommendations as to the time that a kipa is worn; for
   example, Conservative practice is to cover the head in the following
   situations:

     * Whenever in the sanctuary of a synagogue.

     * When praying and when studying or reading from sacred literature.

     * Whenever performing any ritual.

     * When eating, since eating is always followed by a benediction.
       Some follow the minhag of certain Jewish communities in Germany
       where they cover their heads during the blessing before the meal
       and during the benedictions after the meal, but not during the
       meal itself.
       
   In Israel wearing a kipa also has a social significance. While wearing
   a kipa shows that you are somewhat religious, not-wearing one is like
   stating "I'm not religious". The style of kipa in Israel can also
   indicate political and religious affiliations.
   
   The wearing of the kipah at school and work has increased in recent
   years. These are also affectionately called "beanies," "holy
   headgear," "Yamahas," "Yid-lids," and "Kapeles." (Similarly, some hair
   coverings for married women are affectionately called "shmattehs.")
   
   On Usenet, some related, but not necessarily common, "Jewish" smilies
   might be:
   
   (;;:-)
          Clean-shaven smiley wearing a kipa
          
   @:-)
          Modest married smiley wearing snood/beret
          
   {:-)
          Modest married smiley wearing sheitel (wig)
          
   [|:-)}
          Smiley wearing black fedora and short beard
          
   {|B-)==
          Smiley wearing glasses, streimel (fur hat), and long beard
          
   (;{8-{)}
          Smiling bearded guy with (most of) his own hair and a kipa
          
   :---)
          Antisemitic long-nosed smiley

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.3: Dress: What is a Tallis? Tzit-tzit(those fringes)?
         Why do Jews wear them?

Answer:
   
   In the Torah, there is a commandment to wear "fringes" on the corners
   of garments. That is, all garments of a certain size or larger that
   have at least four corners must have strings known as tzitzit
   attached. The original requirement was to have a blue thread among the
   white threads. However, since the precise shade of blue is no longer
   known and the source of the dye used, only the white threads are used
   (except among certain chassidic groups that claim to know the dye
   formula.)
   
   Since the normal clothing in our time does not have four square
   corners, Traditional Jews wear a garment that is specifically made to
   have four corners so that the mitzvah can be fulfilled. This is known
   as the "Tallit Katan" or "Tzitzit" and is usually worn under the
   shirt. Some people wear them with the tzitzit showing, others conceal
   them. The verses giving this commandment are found in the third
   paragraph of the Sh'ma, which is recited during the morning and
   evening prayers.
   
   During prayers, the custom is to wear a large rectangular garment with
   tzitzit (Tallis Gadol) and pray while wrapped in it. There are
   different customs as to when this is done. Most Ashkenazic men will
   begin wearing the Tallis when they get married. In some Sephardic and
   German-Ashkenazi communities, a boy will put on a tallis when he
   becomes a bar-mitzvah (13 years old). There are some communities that
   begin this earlier. Customs vary among liberal Jews as to who wears a
   tallis, and when it's worn.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.4: Dress: What are those black boxes and leather
         straps Jewish men wear?

Answer:
   
   They are called "tefillin" (mentioned in the Torah as "totafos"), and
   contain parchments with verses from the Torah. During the weekday
   morning service they are worn on the head ("between your eyes") and on
   the arm ("upon your hand") in fulfillment of the Torah commandment in
   the Sh'ma. If you go to a traditional shul and lack tefillin, you can
   be sure that someone will lend you his and assist you in fulfilling
   this mitzvah.
   
   One of the medieval blood libels was to tell gentile peasants that
   Jews poisoned wells, and received coded magic instructions in small
   black boxes. The mobs would destroy the expensive tefillin to open
   them, and mistake the Hebrew verses as "magic codes," followed by the
   usual rape, murder, and pillage of Jews that (alas) characterized much
   of medieval Europe.
   
   Note that in some congregations, women also wear tefillin. Although
   halakha exempts women from this mitzvah, it does not explicitly
   prohibit them from following it. Some segments of Orthodoxy do feel
   that actions that are not commanded must be considered as forbidden.
   However, non-Orthodox movements, and some liberal segments of the
   Orthodox community, do permit it. In those movements that permit the
   practice, the wearing of teffilin has become an important way for
   Jewish women to express their Judaism.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.5: Dress: Why do many Jewish men sport beards?

Answer:
   
   The Torah, the Five Books of Moses, has a commandment not to shave the
   corners of the head. Actually, the sideburns merely have to be long
   enough that one can pull on the hair, and the beard area can be shaved
   with something other than a sharp blade (many people accept the use of
   electric shavers). But specifically within the Chassidic community,
   there is a custom not to shave (and frequently not even to trim) the
   beard, and to permit the sideburn area (all the way up to the top of
   the ear) to grow long as well. Some tuck the hair up under their
   kipot/skullcaps, while others curl the hair.
   
   On a practical level, shaving or trimming of the beard is not
   permitted on the Sabbath or Holidays, and for a few stretches during
   the year [such as portions of the time between Pesach and Shavuos]. A
   beardless man will grow days or weeks of stubble, but a bearded man
   who doesn't shave or trim his beard during that time will not look
   significantly different.
   
   To be specific, the Law is that one must not use a straight razor
   (including safety-razors) on one's temples or to shave one's beard.
   Those Jewish men who have wanted to be clean-shaven have had various
   options; in the past century, either depilatory powder (ancestor to
   Nair), or electric shavers. Electric shavers (at least most of them;
   check with your local Orthodox rabbi for acceptable brands) function
   like a scissors: two relatively dull blades pinch off the hair, rather
   than one very sharp blade slicing it off.
   
   Chasidim and some others have kabbalistic reasons for growing a beard,
   so they will not take advantage of modern technology. Otherwise,
   Jewish men having beards have it for other reasons, be they simply "to
   look Jewish" or style or whatever.
   
   As for sidelocks, that is a result of a peculiar interpretation of the
   law against shaving one's temples. The basic law is that there must
   remain enough hair to bend it over with one's fingers; that can be as
   little as 1/2 inch or so. Some, notably Hungarian chasidim and
   Yemenites, do not cut the sidelocks at all, and they grow very long.
   Most chasidim have short sidelocks: thin, 2-3", that they tuck behind
   their ears, so you won't see them.
   
   Many who grow long peyos do so for Kabbalistic reasons. One of the
   opinions in Kabbalah is that the peyos need to be worn long only until
   the beard grows in. Once the beard grows, the peyos of the side of the
   head should not be allowed to grow down beyond where the sides of the
   beard begin to appear.
   
   Finally, some Jewish men just don't like to shave.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.6: Dress: Why do some Orthodox Jews, especially
         Chassidim, wear a distinctive style of clothing (i.e., fur hats,
         black coats, gartel)?

Answer:
   
   The particular appearance is a matter of local custom for the group.
   
   Black Clothes:
          Black is the color of Gevurah (severity), and thus is a
          symbolically appropriate garb for serious and important events
          (praying, holidays, etc.) Those who wear such clothes all week
          are thus indicating that their daily life is also bound up in
          divrei yirah shamayim [fearing heaven].
          
          It is worth noting that black was the traditional colour of
          formal wear among many circles in the 18 Century CE. Hassidic
          garb is based on what the first Rebbes wore, and by and large
          represents the colours worn by Polish and other central
          Europeans.
          
   Gartel:
          It is required by the Shulchan Aruch (code of Jewish law) to
          have a separation between the top half of the body and the
          bottom while praying. Those who do not wear a gartel hold that
          other clothes satisfy the halacha; e.g., a regular belt or the
          waistband of his pants.
          
   Hat:
          A double head covering (and more complete head covering than a
          kippot) is used during davening. Some choose to wear it all the
          time, but it is not required. Some wear it while eating.
          
          The style of hat varies by groups, and the black hat is
          relatively modern. In the pre-war Lithuanian Yeshivot, grey
          suits and grey fedoras were the style and many in the Litvish
          tradition still wear grey and blue suits. In Jerusalem until
          the 1960s, Panama Hats were worn in the summer by some Haredim,
          and one very occasionally still sees Haredim wearing them.
          Right now in the yeshivah world, black suits and black
          Borsalino hats seem to be de rigeur; yet it wasn't that long
          ago that many yeshivah bocherim wore black berets, and flat
          caps were not unknown.
          
   Some wear a (distinctive) gartel or hat (or simply a
   not-so-distinctive jacket) just for davening, to provide extra honor
   when talking to G-d. There is also a kabbalistic justification of the
   double head covering that refers to two distinct aspects of one's
   soul.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.7: Dress: What is Shaatnez?

Answer:
   
   `Shaatnez' is the occurence of wool and linen in the same garment.
   There are various prohibitions (Lev 19:19, Deut 22:9-11) against the
   mingling of different kinds; this is one of them. A linen tie worn
   with a wool suit is permitted, but a wool suit with linen threaded
   buttons is prohibited.
   
   While in practice, many garments do not have any Shaatnez and may be
   assumed to have none, the particulars vary by garment type. The
   padding in many garments such as suits or the embroidery thread, such
   as designs on sweaters (men's and women's) may cause shaatnez
   problems. The padding filler in many suits is made of assorted rags
   which may be mixed linen and wool in themselves (so it is not just a
   worry of linen threaded padding in a wool shell suit).
   
   Nowadays, the usual way of observing the Shaatnez prohibitions is to
   first check the fabric list (careful: lana/lino is Spanish for
   wool/linen). If the fabric list shows a forbidden mixture, don't
   bother, you probably can't get it fixed. If the label shows "other" it
   may or may not be linen. Even if the label shows 100% wool, there may
   still be problems.
   
   Since the fabric list on suits usually refer only to the shell (and
   ignore padding or ornamental threads), the label can only be used to
   identify garments that definitely have shaatnez. Thus if the label
   indicates that the suit (for example) can be good, take it to a
   Shaatnez lab for testing. Most cities with at least a medium sized
   Orthodox community have qualified Shaatnez testers. If the city has a
   local Vaad Hakashrus they can usually refer you to a reliable tester.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.1.8: Dress: Are there any special dress rules or customs
         for women?

Answer:
   
   Traditionally, there are halachic rules and community customs that
   lead to a particular pattern of dress for those that observe the
   halacha regarding modesty. This is most typical among the Orthodox
   segment of Judaism, but is occasionally found elsewhere. It is good to
   keep these rules in mind if you visit traditional communities,
   especially in Israel. These dress rules/customs include:

     * Sleeves are typically covered as far as the elbow.

     * The neckline does not expose any cleavage.

     * Skirts are long enough to cover the knee when seated.

     * Depending on the area, pants or slacks may be allowed; for
       example, in many religious kibbutzim the women wear pants out of
       habit, for the simple reason that they work in agricultural areas
       or other activities where a skirt would be less modest. However,
       this is the exception; when not performing these activities,
       skirts are worn. Women not in such situations at all are
       encouraged not to wear pants.

     * Married women cover their hair either completely, or with
       approximately 2 finger widths showing of the bangs. As to
       unmarried women, hair covering is not required, although there are
       Sephardi customs that even unmarried women should "put their hair
       up", so that it's not flying 'wildly' (but not necessary to cover
       it).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.2.1: Sex and Purity: What's this I've heard about a hole
         in a sheet?

Answer:
   
   We don't know what you've heard, but what we've heard is that when it
   comes time for three men to "witness" a woman's conversion [involving
   nude immersion], what's commonly done is for the water's surface to be
   covered with a thick, opaque sheet with a hole in it, just big enough
   to let her head through while discreetly shielding the rest of her
   body.
   
   Anything else is probably just your warped imagination, and no, we
   still have no idea of what you're thinking, but you should be ashamed
   of yourself, just in case. And another thing, it's not true, so there!
   
   Actually, there is an urban legend regarding what you think. As with
   any urban legend, there is a spark of truth in it. Here are two
   explanations:

     * The myth derives from seeing Jews in religious neighborhoods
       hanging their "talitot katan" out to dry. This poncho-like garment
       is about two feet by four feet, has a fringe on each corner, and a
       hole in the center for the wearer's head, and it looks somewhat
       like a small sheet with a hole, and many people have vivid and
       warped imaginations.

     * There is such a practice, but it is based on a misreading of the
       Kitzur Shulchan Aruch, a poor source for information on mainstream
       halakhic opinion on sexual matters. Most consider the legend to be
       an incorrect practice. Nevertheless, the practice does seem to
       survive in some "fanatical" extremes of Orthodox Judaism, without
       Rabbinic agreement.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.2.2: Sex and Purity: Can a Jewish man only uncover his
         wife a hands-breadth?

Answer:
   
   This "legend" is derived from a one of several conflicting
   interpretations of what was said about Rabbi Eliezer ben Horkanos in
   Nedarim 20a,b. It runs as follws:
   
     "Ima Shalom [R. Eliezer's wife] was asked why her children were so
     very good-looking. She told them " ` ... and when he speaks to
     [Rashi: copulates with] me, he uncovers a handsbreadth and covers a
     handsbreadth and he seems to be coerced by a demon."
     
   The conflicting interpretations are as follows:

     * Rashi (ad loc.). Handsbreadth: of her clothing. Seems to be
       coerced by a demon: Comes upon her powerfully, as if a demon were
       coercing him. However, some say that he covers himself completely
       [and only uncovers as much of himself as necessary], as if he were
       afraid of a demon.

     * Ra"N [R. Nissim bar Ya`kov] (ad loc.). Handsbreadth: [citing
       Berakhot 23B] a woman is permitted to uncover two handsbreadths
       when she urinates. He uncovered only one handbreath, leaving the
       second one covered. Seems to be driven by a demon: He would hurry
       [through the act] like a man coerced by a demon, but would
       [literally] speak to her during intercourse.

     * Ro'Sh [R. Asher ben Ye`hiel] (ad loc). Handsbreadth: [An obscure
       reason not easily figured out] or perhaps in order not to enjoy
       direct body contact, as in [intercourse] through a sheet
       (Yerushalmi Yebamot 1,1) [This reference to Rabbi Jose ben
       Halafta's behavior, while he was levir to his brother's widow, may
       be the origin of the urban legend about the "hole in the sheet"].

     * Hameiri (ad loc). ...he should uncover a handsbreadth of her
       clothing and cover that handsbreadth with his own ...

     * Rambam (Hilkhot De`ot 5,4). ... he should speak to her and sport
       with her a bit until she relaxes, and then couple with her
       modestly and not brutally ...
       
   Not much of a consensus, as you can see. Choose whatever
   interpretation you like. Rashi's first explanation has the ring of
   truth: It was R. Eliezer's way of building up sexual excitement by
   foreplay. As supporting evidence, we continue to read the text: "I
   (Ima Shalom) asked him `Why do you do this?' He aswered `So that I
   should not look [with desire] at any other woman'".
   
   Note that the Talmud in Ketubot 48 states that the proper way for a
   man and woman to have sex is for both to be nude; in fact it goes on
   to state that if one insists on wearing clothes during the act, that
   can be considered grounds for divorce. This was later codified in the
   Shulkhan Arukh (16th century), Even ha-Ezer 76:13
   
   For a detailed and sensitive discussion of Jewish views towards sex
   and sexuality, see "Does God Belong in the Bedroom?" by Rabbi Michael
   Gold (published by JPS), and "Kosher Sex: A Recipe for Passion and
   Intimacy" by Rabbi Shmuley Boteach (published by Doubleday).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.2.3: Sex and Purity: What is a "mikveh"?

Answer:
   
   A mikva or mikveh is a place used for ritual immersions. A proper
   mikva contains a minimum of 40 SE'AH--about 191 U.S. gallons (Sorry,
   but you'll have to do your own metric conversion.) of undrawn water.
   In general, if there are more than 40 SE'AH, then the remainder of the
   water may come from any source.
   
   "Undrawn" means not filled by bucket or by metal pipes.
   
   Natural lakes, whether or not fed by streams or rivers, fall into the
   category of "undrawn waters." Many synagogues also provide indoor
   mikvas.
   
   Additional information may be found in N. Lamm, A Hedge of Roses; and
   I. Klein, A Guide to Jewish Religious Practice (Chapter 37).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.3.1: Writing: Why do some people write "G-d" with a
         hyphen instead of an `o'?

Answer:
   
   The traditional names of G-d may not be destroyed. One way to avoid
   this problem is to not write the full name down in the first place.
   Strictly speaking, this only applies to Hebrew on a permanent medium,
   but many people are careful here beyond the minimum.
   
   Even some who are not strict (or even observant) in general will write
   "G-d", to emphasize that Jewish conceptions of G-d are meant. Note
   that if you disagree with another poster's decision to omit or include
   the hyphen, you should not publicly criticize or ridicule said poster.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.3.2: Writing: Why do some Jews write "J-s-s" and
         "Xianity?"

Answer:
   
   Some Jews consider Jesus to have been an ordinary man and write his
   name like that of any other man. Some question whether or not he even
   existed, possibly being a myth borrowed from similar stories. Others
   ascribe to him the status of a "deity worshipped by others," whose
   name Jews should not pronounce. Many extend this ban to the written
   form. Some write "Xianity" as a simple shorthand, like "Xmas," while
   others prefer not to write "Christianity" lest it appear that they
   consider Jesus to have been the Messiah.
   
   Note that the shorthands "Xianity" and "Xmas" do not derive from
   attempting to "blot out" the Jesus's name; rather, they arose because
   the first letter of the Christ in greek (Christos) is a Chi, which
   looks like an "X". In fact, the shorthand is used by many Christians.
   
   The possible halachic problem with writing Christ derives from the
   fact that "christos" is the Greek word for Messiah/moshiach. Hence
   some argue that writing the name Christ in full tacitly acknowledges
   (G-d forbid) that Jesus was the Messiah.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.4.1: Practices Towards Others: Does Judaism permit
         slavery?

Answer:
   
   There are really two questions here:
   
   Question 1: Does Halacha Permit Jews to Own Slaves?
   
   First, note that "Slavery" in the Torah generally refers to temporary
   indentured servitude to one's creditor. Such slavery was permitted
   under Jewish law. However, the treatment of Jews towards their slaves
   was much more humane than that of the surrounding culture, for a key
   element of Judaism is to remember that Jews were once slaves in Egypt
   (in fact, this is the central theme of the holiday of Pesach).
   
   In Judaism, the slave was protected. Exodus 21:2-11 defines the rights
   of the servant. Quoting from the Hertz Penatateuch and Haftorahs:
   
     Slavery, as permitted by the Torah was quite different from Greek
     and Roman Slavery, or even the cruel system in some modern
     countries down to our own times. In Hebrew law, the slave was not a
     thing, but a human being; he was not the chattel of a master who
     had unlimited power over him. In the Hebrew language, there is only
     one word for slave and servant. Brutal treatment of any slave,
     whether Hebrew or heathen, secures his immediate liberty.
     
   Jewish law required that a slave could go free in the seventh year of
   service (Exodus 21:2), although his family would not be freed;
   although if he came into servitude with a wife, that wife would also
   be freed. The slave could, however, indicate that they perferred
   bondage to freedom. Every fiftieth year (the "Jubilee"), the slaves
   with their families would be emancipated, and property (except house
   property in a walled city) would revert to its original owner. (Lev
   XXV:8-55).
   
   Question 2: Did Jews own Slaves?
   
   It is true that some Jews in the Southern U.S. before the Civil War
   did own slaves (alas), and there were intense antebellum debates on
   the subject; for example, Rabbi Morris Raphall of Congregation B'nai
   Jeshurun in New York, preached a sermon in 1861 defending slavery,
   while David Einhorn of Baltimore, a committed abolitionist, was forced
   to flee town. Additionally, recent research [FABER, ELI : Jews,
   Slaves, and the Slave Trade: Setting the Record Straight. ; New York
   University Press, (1998)].suggests that Jews in the Caribbean held
   slaves in numbers approximately similar to non-Jews of equivalent
   socio-economic strata. However, Jewish Law prohibts treating a slave
   like chattel and abusing him or her.
   
   A good site with information on Jewish participation in the Civil War
   is http://www.jewish-history.com/civilwar.htm

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.4.2: Practices Towards Others: What does "eye for an
         eye" mean?

Answer:
   
   The Written Law does, in Exodus 21:24 demand an "eye for an eye"
   (Exodus 21:24). However, the Oral Law explains that the verse must be
   understood as requiring monetary compensation: the value of an eye is
   what must be paid.
   
   Note that the Written Law does NOT imply "lex talionis" - gouging out
   the perpetrator's eye as retaliatory punishment. Gandhi and many
   others misunderstood this verse.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.5.1: Weddings: Why is the glass broken at Jewish
         weddings?

Answer:
   
   Even at the most joyous occasion in the couple's life, we are
   commanded by our sages to remember that our joy will never be complete
   until our temple is rebuilt in Jerusalem. Breaking a glass has become
   the traditional way to express this idea. Many grooms also place a
   small amount of ashes upon their head at the ceremony to express the
   same idea. Before breaking the glass, at some weddings a short sad
   song about the destruction of the temple is sung.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.5.2: Weddings: What is a Ketubah?

Answer:
   
   The ketubah is a marrage contract between the husband and wife. It may
   be printed; more often, it is hand written in beautiful calligraphy
   and illuminated by a sofer, or scribe. Much of the traditional Aramaic
   text is over 2,000 years old, and the present form was fixed in the
   eighth or ninth century. The ketubah formalizes the groom's commitment
   to protect and care for the bride. The ketubah has two signatures from
   close friends or respected teachers as formal witnesses to his
   commitment.
   
   In the liberal movements, the text of the Ketubah has been modified to
   be more egalitarian, and provide equal protection for both husband and
   wife. Some Ketubahs also include language to address the issue of
   husbands that refuse to provide a get, or bill of divorce, when
   requested by the wife.
   
   There is another way to view the Ketubah: think of it as the first
   prenuptual contract!

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.5.3: Weddings: What are some other common Jewish wedding
         customs?

Answer:
   
   Here (slightly modified) is some information on wedding customs that
   Eliot Shimoff wrote for his daughter's wedding. Note that the specific
   customs that are followed vary by community.
   
   Before the Wedding: 
          Oyfrufn. On the Shabbat morning before the wedding, it is
          common for the hatan (groom) to be called up to read the Torah
          in the synagogue. After the groom recites the final blessings,
          some communities throw candy and raisins to wish the groom a
          sweet life.
          
          Fasting. The couple will not have seen each other for the week
          before their wedding day. On the wedding day itself, they fast
          and recite special prayers; the day is a personal Yom Kippur
          (Day of Atonement) for them. They begin their married life free
          from the taint of sin, a fresh slate, as it were.
          
          Kittel. Keeping with the Yom Kippur theme, the bride and groom
          traditionally wear white at the wedding as a symbol of purity.
          
   The Reception: 
          The bride is often seated on a bridal chair, and is greeted by
          friends and family members. In an adjacent room, the groom
          meets with his friends, who may sing and share the celebration.
          He may attempt a brief lecture on some issue in Jewish law; if
          so, custom dictates that he be interrupted by his friends'
          singing.
          
   Tena'im--The Engagement: 
          Engagement in Jewish law is more than just the intention to
          marry; it carries considerable legal and social significance.
          The official Jewish engagement takes place at the groom's
          table, with the signing of "Tena'im," which creates the Jewish
          legal status of "engaged." The honor of reading the contract
          (in Aramaic) is often given to a prominent rabbi or close
          friend. Then, the mothers of the bride and groom break a china
          plate, signifying the completion of the engagement agreement.
          
   The Ketubah: 
          The ketubah, or marriage contract, may be printed, or it may be
          written in beautiful calligraphy and illuminated. Much of the
          Aramaic text is over 2,000 years old, and the present form was
          fixed in the eighth or ninth century. The ketubah formalizes
          the groom's commitment to protect and care for the bride. The
          ketubah has two signatures from close friends or respected
          teachers as formal witnesses to his commitment.
          
          After the ketubah is prepared, the groom is asked if he is
          prepared to fulfill his obligations as stated in the ketubah.
          The traditional method of indicating agreement is for the group
          to take hold of a handkerchief or some other object given him
          by the rabbi. This is performed in the presence of witnesses.
          
   Badeken: Veiling the Bride 
          After the signing of the ketubah, the fathers of the bride and
          groom escort the groom to the bride, where guests dance and
          sing. There, the groom will place the veil over the bride's
          face. The roots of this custom date back at least 600 years,
          and is based on talmudic sources. Perhaps the ceremony
          signifies modesty, or the groom's responsibility--defined in
          the ketubah--for clothing the bride. Or the groom may be
          symbolically confirming the identity of the bride.
          
          The couple will be blessed by their fathers, as they have been
          many times before. At this point, the groom and his friends
          exit singing and dancing, to prepare for the ceremony.
          
   Chuppah: The Marriage Ceremony 
          The ceremony itself is a combination of symbolism, traditions,
          and religiously binding acts.
          
          The central physical symbol is the Chuppah, the marriage
          canopy. It is a canopy supported by four poles; it originally
          referred to a chamber reserved for the bride on her wedding
          day. The custom of using a chuppah originated with the rabbis
          in the Middle Ages, to separate the wedding ceremony (which was
          held outdoors) from any surrounding marketplace.
          
          The chuppah represents the home that they will create together,
          and the Divine Presence under which they will be married. One
          nice custom is to have honored friends hold the chuppah poles.
          In some families, the custom is to make a family chuppah, and
          to pass it down from generation to generation (as opposed to a
          wedding dress).
          
   Escorting the Bride and Groom: 
          The bride and groom are escorted to the chuppah by their
          parents, who carry candles to light the way. The groom dons a
          kittel, a white robe worn on the High Holidays. Neither the
          bride nor groom wear jewelry under the Chuppah; the ring he
          gives her under the chuppah should be of unparalleled
          importance to her.
          
   The Ring:
          Traditionally, the ring presented from the groom to the bride
          must be worth at least a perutah (about a dime), and must be
          owned free and clear by the groom. It must be a band of metal,
          with no holes going through it (this eliminates any
          misunderstandings about the value of the ring). There are
          traditionally no stones, for if a stone were set in the ring,
          the wife might overestimate its worth, and this might
          invalidate her acceptance of it. Note that a different ring may
          be worn after the ceremony.
          
   Seven Circles: 
          The bride circles the groom seven times, symbolically making
          him the center of her life. The mothers of the bride and groom
          follow, showing that the family will be an integral part of
          that life. The custom comes from the verse in Jer. 31:22: "A
          woman shall court (go around) a man".
          
   The Blessings: 
          There are nine blessings recited under the chuppah.
          
          The first two blessings -- one over the wine and the second
          solemnifying the betrothal -- represent the first part of the
          ceremony.
          
          Next, two witnesses are called; they examine the wedding band
          to be sure that it meets standards of Jewish law (that it of
          one piece and without embedded stones). The groom then places
          the ring on the bride's index finger and formally declares her
          to be his wife. They are, at that point, fully married
          according to Jewish law.
          
          The ketubah will be read (usually by a prominent rabbi or
          scholar). The groom will then give it to the bride; the ketubah
          is, strictly speaking, the bride's.
          
          The seven blessings that are then recited are among the most
          sentimental and beautiful of the Jewish liturgy, and are
          unparalleled expressions of joy. In a tradition at least 800
          years old, the groom breaks a glass, symbolically remembering
          the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, destroyed by the
          Romans in the year 70. The ceremony is over. With singing and
          dancing, the couple are escorted from the room.
          
   Yichud: Seclusion 
          The couple will, for the first time, be alone together as
          husband and wife. They will break their fast and prepare for
          the rest of the wedding celebration. Yichud is important; some
          rabbinic sources suggest that the marriage is not complete
          until the bride and groom have had the opportunity to be alone
          together.
          
   The First Dance: 
          The couple will enter the banquet room, to be greeted with
          joyous dancing and singing. At traditional weddings, the men
          and women dance separately (see 8.8). If you don't know the
          words (Hebrew, Aramaic, or a combination) to the songs, don't
          be concerned; just sing along. While some of the dances have
          formal "steps," you will be able to participate in most of them
          even if you've never tried before; spirit and enthusiasm will
          usually get you through. Entertaining the bride and groom and
          increasing their joy is an integral part of the celebration,
          and all the guests are expected to join.
          
   The Dinner: 
          The dinner--with intervening episodes of dancing--is sanctified
          from beginning to end. The blessings at the end of the meal
          have special additions in honor of the bride and groom. The
          seven blessings first recited under the chuppah are repeated at
          the end of the dinner.
          
   The Bridal Week: 
          The bridal celebrations continue for the entire week following
          the wedding. Only at the end of the week will life begin to
          settle down to a more conventional routine. Even so, the bride
          and groom retain the status of queen and king for the entire
          first year of marriage.
          
   There are some other interesting wedding customs, as described in The
   Jewish Catalog:

     * There is a custom that the bride give the groom a tallit on the
       day of the wedding. This is because the tallit represents the
       number 32, which is the number of fringes on the shawl. The number
       32 is the numerical equivalent of the Hebrew word for heart.

     * In Europe, a jester was hired for a large wedding. His job was to
       be an actor, singer, poet, etc. and master of ceremonies.

     * We are all familiar with the concept of the Jewish matchmater as
       illustrated on the stage in Fiddler on the Roof. Yes, some
       communities still use matchmakers and arranged marriages.

     * In some communities, the bride and groom are wrapped together by a
       single tallit (in fact, this was done for the FAQ maintainer; the
       same tallit was later used to wrap the maintainer's daughter when
       she was named).

     * It is common to set the wedding date for a Tuesday, because on the
       third day of creation, the Torah repeats twice: "and G-d saw how
       good it was".

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.5.4: Weddings: What should I wear to a Jewish wedding?

Answer:
   
   Suggestions for Dress:
   
   Traditional dress for men is a suit and tie; kippot (skull caps) are
   usually available for those who do not have them. Traditionally, women
   wear a dress with sleeves and a high neckline.
   
   Greetings: 
   
   The traditional greeting--"Mazal Tov" (Good Luck)--is extended to all
   guests, both relatives and friends.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.6.1: Death and Burial: Is it true that someone with
         tattoos cannot be buried in a Jewish cemetery?

Answer:
   
   While tattooing is against Jewish law, there is also a principle that
   a person can repent up until the moment of death. The assumption is
   that the person did teshuva (repented) before they died, and so there
   should be no problem burying them in a Jewish cemetery. Of course, it
   is probably appropriate to CYLAR* (appropriate rabbi) as well as
   CYLAFD* (appropriate funeral director).
   

   *[CYL = "Consult your local"]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.6.2: Death and Burial: I've heard about a custom of
         putting stones on the grave. Do you know where this custom
         originated?

Answer:
   
   Originally, there were no engraved tombstones like we have today;
   instead, visitors to the gravesite would each put a stone on the
   grave. Over the years, a mound of stones would accumulate,
   memorializing the deceased through the hands of his/her loved ones.
   
   Although Jews now follow the common practice of putting up tombstones
   (generally unveiled eleven months following the actual funeral and
   burial), many people still hold to the earlier custom of a more
   personal monument. Note that the eleven months date may vary; in
   Israel, and in many communities abroad, the stone is erected around
   the shloshim - 30 days after death. In other places, it is around the
   first yahrzeit - one year after death (which could be 13 months in a
   leap year).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 11.7.1: Charity: What are the levels of giving?

Answer:
   
   Maimonides defines nine levels in giving charity (Tzedakah):
    1. Giving assistance to a someone who has fallen on hard times by
       presenting a gift or loan, or entering into a partnership with the
       person, or finding them work, thereby helping that person to
       become self supporting.
    2. Giving assistance in such a way that the giver and recipient are
       unknown to each other.
    3. Donations to the community charities, which should only be done if
       there is confidence that the charity is administered in an honest,
       prudent, and efficient fashion.
    4. Donations when the donor is aware to whom the charity is being
       given, but the recipient is unaware of the source.
    5. Donations when the recipient is aware of the donor's identity, but
       the donor still doesn't know the specific identity of the
       recipient.
    6. Donations where each party knows the other, but the gift is given
       unasked.
    7. Donations where each party knows the other, but the gift is given
       only after a specific request.
    8. Donations where each party knows the other, but the gift is given
       only after a specific request, and the donor gives less than
       should be given (but does so willingly).
    9. Donations given grudgingly.
       
   (based on Yad, Matanot Ani'im X 1-14)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.12 07:58


End of SCJ FAQ Part 5 (Worship and Who is a Jew) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:09 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yi-000OVgC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:08 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05132
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:25 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 9F1D47A143
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:13 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 3B7517A13C
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:10 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28092 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:34 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:34 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032534.28091.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 06-Jewish-Thought
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 67038
Lines: 1364

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Jewish Thought (6/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.6>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/06-Jewish-Thought
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Questions about Philosophy and Jewish Concepts
Message-ID: <faq.6_970510021@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/06-Jewish-Thought
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.06-Jewish-Thought
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
                            Part 6: Jewish Thought
                    [Last Post: Mon Oct  2 11:07:07 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                Section 12:
                               Jewish Thought
                                      
    1. What is the Jewish concept of G-d? Do Jews think of G-d as an
       angry old man with a long white beard? 
    2. Can one doubt G-d's existence and still be a good Jew? 
    3. Does modern science (e.g., "big bang" theory, evolution, the age
       of the world) contradict traditional readings of the Torah? 
    4. Does modern science contradict liberal readings of the Torah? 
    5. Can one be Orthodox and a scientist too? 
    6. I've heard that Jews consider themselves "chosen." What does that
       mean? 
    7. What is the Jewish concept of the Messiah? 
    8. What do Jews say happens when a person dies? Do Jews believe in
       reincarnation? In hell or heaven? 
    9. What was the job of a prophet? 
   10. It seems that prophecy was once central to Judaism; why don't we
       have prophets today? 
   11. Who were the prophets? How many? 
   12. What is the Jewish view on the question of "free will." 
   13. What about angels, demons, miracles, and the supernatural? 
   14. What do Jews hope/expect of the future? 
   15. How can Jews reject (insert true belief here)? 
   16. Why do Jews need organized religion or Jewish laws? Isn't it good
       enough to be a good person? How about gentiles? 
   17. How does Judaism differ from Xianity, Marxism, Communism, Humanism
       and other -isms? 
   18. Where can a Gentile learn about Judaism? 
   19. What does Judaism say about non-Jews and their role? What does G-d
       demands of gentiles to get to Olam Ha'aba ["The World-to-come"]?
       What are the Noachide laws? 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.1: What is the Jewish concept of G-d? Do Jews think of
         G-d as an angry old man with a long white beard?

Answer:
   
   No. That image is an anthropomorphism of an extreme application of
   judgment (seen as anger), and wisdom (associated with old men). The
   image is part of the "angry jealous Old Testament G-d" misconception,
   which ignores G-d's showing kindness and mercy throughout the Torah.
   
   Traditional Jews view G-d as omnipotent and unique, tempering judgment
   with mercy. The verse from Shemos [Exodus] 23:23 "And I will remove my
   hand and you shall see my back, but my face shall not be seen" is
   taken to mean that we will come to know G-d through His works, and
   through observing his commandments. See Handbook of Jewish Thought by
   R' Aryeh Kaplan.
   
   Jews conceive of G-d as an absolutely simple Unity (implying
   absolutely no constituent divisions), beyond all constraints
   (including time and place), and beyond all limitations of human
   conception. To the extent that we are even able to refer to G-d, it is
   solely through our assignment of human-like attributes to what we
   perceive as G-d's interactions with creation. These attributes provide
   us with simple terms to which we can relate, but in no way limit or
   constrain G-d.
   
   All descriptions of G-d that involve human characteristics are
   attempts by human beings to understand the infinite. These human
   characteristics can only be crude approximations of the attributes of
   G-d, in the same way that a robot's hand, while fashioned in the image
   of our own, can only be a crude approximation of the complexity of a
   human hand.
   
   Likewise, we often ascribe to G-d the ultimate expression of desirable
   traits that fallible humans can only imperfectly attain. Thus the term
   "Rachman," as used to refer to G-d, is not "merciful" but the
   merciful, and is the standard against which the human characteristic
   of mercy is measured.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.2: Can one doubt G-d's existence and still be a good
         Jew?

Answer:
   
   What does it mean that one doubts G-d's existence? It rarely means
   that one does not believe that G-d exists, rather that a person does
   not understand what G-d does. In other words, that the way G-d runs
   the world is not comprehensible (e.g. not understanding why G-d allow
   things like famine or the Holocaust to occur). G-d does not fit into
   our limited intellect. And defining G-d to be something that would fit
   into a human ideal of what G-d should be, would mean that we are
   denying what G-d actually is: something beyond our intellect.
   
   So the answer is: we all have questions about G-d, but it does not
   prevent us from being good Jews. Because being good is not an
   end-goal, rather a process. We struggle to get better despite any
   doubts.
   
   What a Jew does is more important than what he or she believes, even
   though Maimonides included belief in G-d as one of Judaism's key
   principles. Full and complete faith (emunah sh'laimah) in particular
   is a most difficult state to achieve, but the seeds of faith find
   fertile ground in the person of one who earnestly strives to live a
   Jewish life based on the Torah's prescriptions.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.3: Does modern science (e.g., "big bang" theory,
         evolution, the age of the world) contradict traditional readings of
         the Torah?

Answer:
   
   Probably, but science is getting better all the time and one can
   expect agreement eventually...
   
   Seriously, there are numerous neo-traditional readings that put new
   interpretations on various commentaries and are allegedly compatible
   with Orthodoxy. Rambam [Maimonides], for example, warns at the
   beginning of his Mishneh Torah that the literal reading of the opening
   of Bereshis [Genesis] is for the masses. [The non-literal reading he
   had in mind was
   metaphysical, not scientific. See The Guide for the Perplexed.]
   
   Orthodox Jews believe that Creation occurred over 5700 years ago and
   that it took precisely six days. However, today many Orthodox Jews
   believe that it is an open question as to how long each of those
   "days" and "years" were, relative to today's time intervals
   (considering that time itself is one of G-d's creations). One can find
   an array of Orthodox views on the age of the universe, the age of the
   earth, and views on evolution, in "Challenge: Torah Views on Science
   and Its Problems" edited by Aryeh Carmell and Cyril Domb, and in
   Gerald Schroeder's "Genesis and the Big Bang". These works attempt to
   reconcile traditional Jewish texts with modern scientific findings
   concerning evolution, the age of the earth and the age of the
   Universe. Prominent Orthodox rabbis who affirm the veracity of
   scientific findings in these areas include Aryeh Kaplan, Israel
   Lipschitz, Sholom Mordechai Schwadron (the MaHaRSHaM), Zvi H. Chajes,
   and Abraham Isaac Kook. However, many other Orthodox Jews disagree
   with these views, and believe that the text of Genesis must be read
   literally on this subject, and so believe that the Earth literally is
   5760 years old, and that that modern scientific evolutionary and
   cosmological theories are wrong.
   
   A rabbi in the Los Angeles area mused that perhaps the year count is
   based on the end of creation, when mankind had achieved intelligence.
   Certainly all of man's recorded history fits within the almost six
   thousand years. The time before "year 1" can be considered before the
   system was in multiuser mode :-).
   
   You should also consult the section in the general part of the Reading
   Lists on Science and Judaism. There you will find books that explore
   the relationship of Judaism and science.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.4: Does modern science contradict liberal readings of
         the Torah?

Answer:
   
   The liberal Jewish movements who do not hold the text of the Torah as
   a purely factual account don't need to reconcile it with science.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.5: Can one be Orthodox and a scientist too?

Answer:
   
   Definitely! The Association of Orthodox Jewish Scientists
   (http://www.aojs.org/) publishes a quarterly, Intercom, that deals
   with ethical, technical, practical, and philosophical issues. You can
   contact AOJS at INFO@AOJS.ORG 
   
   There is an institute in Israel devoted to using modern technology
   within Halachic constraints. One example of their products is a
   Sabbath telephone that doctors can use in an emergency without fear of
   violating the laws of the Torah.
   
   Tzomet (Tzivtei Mada V'Torah), a similar institute in Gush Etzion, can
   be reached at:
   
    Tzomet
    Alon Shvut
    Gush Etzion 90940
    ISRAEL
    TEL +972-2-931-442
    FAX +972-2-931-889

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.6: I've heard that Jews consider themselves "chosen."
         What does that mean?

Answer:
   
   Contrary to popular belief, nowhere in the Tanakh [Hebrew Bible] or in
   classical Jewish literature is there a claim that Jews are God's only
   "chosen people". The closest that one finds is Exodus 19:5, which
   states that Jews are an "am segulah", a "treasured people", but this
   is a very different claim indeed. The misunderstanding on this issue
   stems from the fact that most people are unfamiliar with the claims
   that Judaism actually makes in regards to chosenness. So what does
   classical Judaism actually state? Consider the bracha [blessing] said
   before reciting the Torah: Praised are you, Lord our God, King of the
   universe, who has chosen us out of all the nations to bestow upon us
   His Torah.
   
   Also consider the blessing recited as an introduction to the reading
   of the "Shema Yisrael" the selection of verses from the Torah
   (especially Deuteronomy 6:4-8) that proclaim the sovereignty of God
   and our commitment to his Torah. The blessing relates to the act of
   the recitation as a fulfilment of the religious obligation of Torah
   study. You have loved us with abounding love, O Lord our God, you have
   shown us great and overflowing tenderness. For the sake of our
   ancestors who trusted in you, and whom you instructed in the precepts
   of life - in the same manner, be gracious unto us and instruct us...
   Put it into our hearts to understand, to become wise, to hear, to
   learn, to teach, to observe, to do, to uphold - all the words of the
   study of Torah, lovingly... For you are the performer of wonders, and
   you have chosen us out of all nations and tongues, and brought us
   close to your great name in truth... Blessed are you, Lord, who
   chooses His people Israel in love.
   
   There are many such examples, and what they all have in common is the
   unstated assumption that there is no thing called the "chosen people,"
   but rather that "choosing" is invariably perceived as a verb. It is a
   dynamic activity that is inextricably identified with Israel's devoted
   observance of the precepts of the Torah. To put it simply, there is no
   "chosen people." Rather, there are people whom God has sanctified by
   commanding them to rest on the Sabbath, to rejoice in the festivals,
   to study the Torah and to accept the yoke of God's supremacy over all
   other allegiances. It certainly has nothing to do with any claim of
   superiority. In fact, the prophet Amos (3:2) states the opposite: "You
   alone have I singled out of all the families of the Earth, that is why
   I will call you to account for your iniquities". Other nations can
   fulfill G-d's will with only seven commandments, rather than the
   hundreds required of Jews. The concept in fact is "chosen to fulfill a
   responsibility," and implies a harder task rather than a higher status
   in the world.
   
   Finally, note that there is no claim to exclusivity in the regards of
   love from God, nor in regard to being able to be chosen for a
   particular purpose. There is only the claim that we were chosen to
   bring the biblical message of the prophets, and to cleave to Torah as
   a way of life. Judaism has always affirmed that gentiles can have a
   close relationship with God as well, and perhaps other nations are
   chosen for their own purposes as well.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.7: What is the Jewish concept of the Messiah?

Answer:
   
   The concept varies based on the movement you ask. The traditional
   opinion was best expressed by Moses Maimonides (RaMBaM), who said the
   following about the Messiah:
   
     "If a king will arise from the House of David who is learned in
     Torah and observant of the mitzvot [the Torah's commandments], as
     prescribed by the written law and the oral law, as David his
     ancestor was, and will compel all of Israel to walk in [the way of
     the Torah] and reinforce the breaches [in its observance]; and
     fight the wars of G-d, we may, with assurance, consider him the
     Messiah.
     
     "If he succeeds in the above, builds the Temple in its place, and
     gathers the dispersed of Israel, he is definitely the Messiah. ...
     
     "If he did not succeed to this degree or he was killed, he surely
     is not [the redeemer] promised by the Torah. [Rather,] he should be
     considered as all the other proper and complete kings of the
     Davidic dynasty who died. G-d only caused him to arise in order to
     test the many, as [Daniel 11:35] states; "and some of the wise men
     will stumble, to try them, to refine, and to clarify until the
     appointed time, because the set time is in the future."
     
   The Rambam then continues by explaining why Judaism has rejected the
   claims of other religions, notably Christianity, that "caused the Jews
   to be slain by the sword, their remnants to be scattered and humbled,
   the Torah to be altered, and the majority of the world to err and
   serve a god other than the L-rd." Since, he said, the required
   criteria [as described in the preceding paragraphs] have not been met,
   all messianic claims to date, such as Christianity or the the beliefs
   of the followers of Shabtai Zvi, have been proven false.
   
   The full text is in his Mishneh Torah, Sefer Shoftim, Hilchot Melachim
   U'Milchamoteihem, Chapter 11. This translation was done by Rabbi
   Eliyahu Touger, published by Moznaim Press, from Halacha 4.
   
   The Rambam's statement is probably the definitive rendering of the
   traditional Jewish view on the subject. Others believe that the
   Messiah will usher in an age of miracles, and will come in a
   miraculous manner.
   
   The liberal movements, such as Reform) do not believe in a personal
   messsiah, but do believe in the concept of a messianic age.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.8: What do Jews say happens when a person dies? Do Jews
         believe in reincarnation? In hell or heaven?

Answer:
   
   In general, and in contrast to some other religions, in day-to-day
   life Jews don't pay much attention to questions like this. The focus
   of Jewish life is living according to G-d's will as expressed in the
   Torah. What happens afterwards is up to G-d.
   
   That said, traditional Judaism does address this question. Keep in
   mind that there are dissenting viewpoints, though this is the dominant
   one:
   
   A living person consists of both body and soul. Both are complex in
   structure and this short answer can't possibly address the details. To
   summarize briefly, when the body dies, if the person merits it, a
   small portion of the soul remains with it to keep it connected with
   the soul's source, anticipating the general revival of the dead at the
   time that G-d decrees. Different parts of the remainder of the soul
   may go to different places. One might be reincarnated into a new body
   in an attempt to rectify another of its spiritual aspects, or for
   other purposes. One part might go to a level of Paradise. Another
   might go to Gehinnom for a period, to remove the sins of that life and
   prepare it for a future one. Another part might join temporarily with
   an already living person, to assist it with its rectification and in
   the process gather more merit. The reassignments of the soul continues
   until the time that G-d decrees.
   
   Rabbinic afterlife teachings varied in different places and times, and
   was never synthesized into one coherent philosophy. As such, the
   different descriptions of the afterlife are not always consistent with
   each other. This is especially true for the descriptions of "Olam
   Haba", the world to come. In some rabbinic works this phrase refers to
   the messianic era, a physical realm right here on Earth. However, in
   other works this phrase means Gan Edan, Paradise (in Heaven, so to
   speak), a purely spiritual realm. At various points in the afterlife
   journey, the soul is said to encounter:

     * Hibbut ha-kever, the pains of the grave

     * Dumah, the angel of silence

     * The angel of death

     * The Kaf ha-Kela, the catapult of the soul

     * Gehenna (purgatory) and Gan Eden (Heaven; Paradise)
       
   A discussion of the classic rabbinic view of the afterlife, including
   these topics and more, can be found in an essay by Rabbi Zalman
   Schacter Shalomi called "Life in the hereafter: A tour of what's to
   come", found at http://www.elevated.fsnet.co.uk/index-page13.html.
   
   Gehenna is fairly well defined in rabbinic literature. It is sometimes
   translated as "hell", but Jews must take note that the Christian
   version of hell is different from the Jewish view of Gehenna. Some
   Christians believe that hell is an abode of eternal torment where
   sinners go, and is also for anyone who does not accept Jesus as their
   messiah and god. Other Christians (including Roman Catholics) believe
   Hell is a place of separation from God (which, for Christians, is
   torture enough), from which believers are eventually saved by Jesus.
   However, for Jews, gehenna - while certainly a terribly unpleasant
   place - is not hell. The majority of rabbinic thought maintains that
   people are not tortured in hell forever; the longest that one can be
   there is said to be 12 months. It is a spiritual forge where the soul
   is purified for its eventual ascent to Gan Eden [Heaven], and where
   all imperfections are purged.
   
   In some descriptions of the afterlife, we find that beyond Gan Eden
   there is a little known realm called the otzar, the divine treasury of
   souls; this is also called the tzror ha-hayyim, the bundle of life.
   This otzar is a transcendent realm of human souls, in the highest
   spheres of creation. Before souls are born they are said to come from
   this treasury, and they return they at some point after death.
   
   Souls are said to originate in a realm called the 'guf' (Avodah Zarah
   5a, Nedarim 13b, Yevamot 62a), from which they descend to the earthly
   real to animate human bodies. After death, these souls return to the
   otzar, or tzror ha-hayyim. (Shabbat 152a; Pesikta Rabbati 2:3)
   
   According to the Kabbalah [Jewish mysticism] every human has at least
   one element in their soul; with the proper study a person can
   eventually develop two higher levels of the soul. A common way of
   explaining the three parts of the soul is as follows:
    1. Nefesh - the lower part, or animal part, of the soul. Is linked to
       instincts and bodily cravings.
    2. Ruach - the middle soul, the spirit. It contains the moral virtues
       and the ability to distinguish between good and evil.
    3. Neshamah - the higher soul, or super-soul. This separates man from
       all other lifeforms. It is related to the intellect, and allows
       man to enjoy and benefit from the afterlife. This part of the soul
       is provided both to Jew and non-Jew alike at birth. It allows one
       to have some awareness of the existence and presence of God.
       The "Raaya Meheimna," a later addition to the Zohar, posits that
       there are in fact two more parts of the human soul, the chayyah
       and yehidah. These parts were considered to represent the
       sublimest levels of intuitive cognition, and were only within the
       grasp of very few individuals.
    4. Chayyah - The part of the soul that allows one to have an
       awareness of the divine life force itself.
    5. Yehidad - the highest plane of the soul, in which one can achieve
       as full a union with God as is possible.
       
   According to the Zohar, after death each aspect of the soul undergoes
   a different experience on the afterlife journey. The lower levels of
   the soul are purified and purged of physical and emotional
   attachments, while the higher levels experience transcendental bliss.
   The nefesh temporarily remains with the body in the grave, undergoing
   the Hibbut Ha-Kever, the suffering of the grave. Simultaneously, the
   Ruach experiences Gehenna for 12 months. "Gehenna is conceived of as a
   purification process in which the psychic remnants from the previous
   life are purged and transformed. This purgation process lasts only
   twelve months and is tormentingly painful in direct proportion to each
   individual's lived life experience. [Simcha Paull-Rapahel ] After
   leaving Gehenna, the ruah then permanently enters the Lower Gan Eden.
   
   After death the Neshama, since it not subject to being tainted by sin,
   goes to Gan Eden Elyon, the Upper Gan Eden, where it experiences
   divine reward and bliss. The hayyah and yehidah also return to Upper
   Gan Eden immediately after death, and become as one with God as is
   possible. "Those who have awakened these dimensions of their being are
   able to perceive the infinite grandeur of the divine realms, to enter
   the everflowing celestial stream - described by the Zoha as the
   "bundle of life". [Paull-Rapahel]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.9: What was the job of a prophet?

Answer:
   
   The primary job of a prophet was not to foretell the future, but to
   arouse the people and the government to repentance and observance.
   Next time someone bugs you about not being Jewish enough, and all
   sorts of nasty ideas float through your head, remind yourself that
   Jeremiah was killed for his preaching. Jonah did not want to be a
   prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.10: It seems that prophecy was once central to Judaism;
         why don't we have prophets today?

Answer:
   
   The traditional view is that prophecy was removed from the world after
   the destruction of the First Temple. Those prophets who are mentioned
   after that were alive at the time of the destruction. There are
   several explanations as to why this is so:
    1. The fact that the Jews did not heed the calls to repentance of the
       prophets showed that they were not worthy. When most of the Jews
       remained in exile after Ezra returned, they showed that they were
       still not worthy of that level of holiness. The second temple did
       not have the level of kedushah [holiness] of the first Temple even
       from the beginning.
    2. This was actually a sign of G-d's mercy. Had the Jews had a
       prophet and continued to disobey (as was probable based on the
       behavior of the following centuries) even after the punishment of
       the exile, they would have merited complete destruction. Now they
       could say that had a prophet come they would have obeyed and thus
       mitigate the punishment (though some consider the current exile
       (i.e., the diaspora) to be harsh enough).
    3. After the destruction of the first Temple the sages prayed for the
       removal of the "Evil Inclination" of idolatry. Since the world
       exists in a balance, the removal of the low point (idolatry)
       necessitated the removal of the high point (prophecy).
       
   Another effect of losing formal prophecy is that it is no longer known
   the specific acts that result in specific good and bad consequences.
   In the age of prophecy, a person undergoing misfortunes could learn
   from a prophet what he or she was doing wrong and how to do tshuva
   (repentance.) Nowadays, your guess is as good as mine, and could be
   wrong in identifying the source of difficulties. This is what
   galus/galut [physical and spiritual exile] is all about. [R' Y. Frand]
   
   Some feel that a tzaddik or a rebbe is particularly qualified to
   provide spiritual guidance and advise paths for repentance.
   
   Note that the above does not claim that all forms of communication
   between God and man are closed; The Talmud only teaches that the most
   direct forms of prophecy no longer occur. However, Judaism affirms
   that other less direct forms of prophecy still occur. One example of
   this is the 'bat kol'. [e.g. Tosefta Sota 13:3, Talmud Yerushalmi Sota
   24b, and Talmud Bavli Sota 48b]
   
   The Talmud notes that each time a Jew studies the Torah or its
   rabbinic commentaries, God is revealed anew; there is still a link
   between the God and the Jewish people. The Talmud in fact declares
   that rabbinic interpretation is superior to the biblical forms of
   prophecy.
   
   Rabbi Abdimi of Haifa said: Since the day when the Temple was
   destroyed, the prophetic gift was taken away from the prophets and
   given to the Sages [Rabbis]. - Is a Sage not also a prophet? What
   Rabbi Abdimi meant to say was this: Although prophecy has been taken
   from the Prophets, prophecy has not been taken from the Sages. Amemar
   said "A Sage is even superior to a Prophet, as it says "And a Prophet
   has the heart of Wisdom" (Psalms 90:21) Who is usually compared with
   whom? Is not the smaller compared with the greater? [Talmud Bavli,
   Bava Batra 12A]
   
   Hillel taught that all Jews still receive ruach ha'kodesh, the Holy
   Spirit, which is an indirect form of prophecy. In the tosefta (Pesah
   4:2) this is stated outright, while in later rabbinic literature
   {Talmud Yerushalmi Shabbat 17a and Pesach 33a, Talmud Bavli 66b) his
   statement is that the Jewish people, if not prophets, are at least the
   bene nevi'im, the sons of prophets.
   
   Although not widely known, many Jews believed that the more direct
   forms of prophecy still existed as late as the middle ages; a few
   medieval rabbis in this era were thought to be prophets by some,
   including Rabbeinu Tam. This is discussed by Rabbi Abraham Joshua
   Heschel in his book "Prophetic Inspiration After the Prophets:
   Maimonides and Others" (Ktav).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.11: Who were the prophets? How many?

Answer:
   
   (Note: "navi" (pl: neviim) = "prophet")
   
   The Talmud (Megillah 14a) says that there had been twice as many
   prophets as the number of people who left Egypt (2*600,000), but only
   those whose messages were for future generations were recorded. This
   count was 48 male and 7 female Prophets.
   
   The Talmud lists the 7 females as:
    1. Sarah
    2. Miriam
    3. Devorah
    4. Hannah (mother of Shmuel)
    5. Avigail (who became a wife of David Hamelech)
    6. Huldah (from the time of Yirmiyahu)
    7. Esther
       
   One compilation of the male prophets (based on Seder Olam) lists the
   following:
    1. Avraham (Abraham)
    2. Yitzchak (Isaac)
    3. Yaakov (Jacob)
    4. Moshe (Moses)
    5. Aharon (Aaron)
    6. Yehoshuah (Joshua)
    7. Pinchas
    8. Elkanah (father of Shmuel)
    9. Eli
   10. Shmuel (Samuel)
   11. Gad
   12. Nosson
   13. David Hamelech (King David)
   14. Shlomo Hamelech (King Soloman)
   15. Aidoin the Golah
   16. Micha Ben Yamla in the time of Achav
   17. Ovadiah
   18. Achiah Hashiloni
   19. Yehu Ben Hanani in the time of Asah
   20. Azaryah Ben Oded in the time of Yehoshaphat from Divrei Hayamim
   21. Haziel from Bnei Masni
   22. Eliezer his cousin
   23. Morishah
   24. Hoshea
   25. Amos in the time of Yeravam Ben Yoash
   26. Micha in the time of Yosam
   27. Eliyahu (Elijah)
   28. Elisha
   29. Yonah Ben Amitai
   30. Yeshayah in the time of Menashe in the time of Yoshea
   31. Yoel (Joel)
   32. Nachum
   33. Habakuk
   34. Zephaniah
   35. Uriah from Kiryat Yearim
   36. Yirmiyahu (Jeremiah)
   37. Yehezkel
   38. Daniel (second year of Darius)
   39. Baruch
   40. Neriah
   41. Sharyah
   42. Machsiyah
   43. Hagai
   44. Zecharyah
   45. Malachi
   46. Mordechai
       
   Rashi (Megillah 3a) suggests that Daniel wasn't a Navi and is to be
   replaced in the list by Shemaia, who told Rehavam not to go to war
   with Yeravam and the northern kingdom.
   
   Rashi closes with "two I don't know" (47 & 48).
   
   A commentator on the side says one is Oded & one is Hanani Haroeh.
   When a Navi is called by his name and his fathers name it is a sign
   that the father is also a Navi. Azriah Ben Oded, Yehu Ben Hanani,
   Zechariah Ben Yehoyada are given as examples.
   
   Rabbein Hananel and the Vilna Gaon start from Moshe and add in the
   sons of Korach.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.12: What is the Jewish view on the question of "free
         will."

Answer:
   
   One traditional Jewish view of free will is that in this phase of
   history, G-d's omnipresence is hidden from our awareness specifically
   to allow us free will. If we were fully aware of G-d's presence at all
   times, we would be incapable of sinning willfully. As it stands we are
   freed to assume or reject the Torah and its prescriptions for Jewish
   life and to be rewarded or punished accordingly. This will change at
   some future point when G-d's omnipresence is fully revealed.
   
   In Devarim (Deuteronomy) 30:19 "I [G-d] have set before you life and
   death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life." From this we
   learn that we have free will. Furthermore, reward and punishment only
   make sense if we have knowledge and free will. Angels cannot be
   rewarded because they do not have free will, and animals are not
   rewarded because they do not have knowledge. There have been a few
   notable exceptions to this last statement, but that is the general
   rule.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.13: What about angels, demons, miracles, and the
         supernatural?

Answer:
   
   The Torah is full of what western secular culture would (somewhat
   derogatorily) call "the supernatural." Even the most fundamental of
   Jewish beliefs, that there is a Creator, falls into this class--how
   much more so the Torah's recounting of events that include such
   out-of-the-ordinary occurrences as prophecy in its many forms, birth
   of children to very aged parents, the appearance of angels and their
   interaction with the physical world, the occurrence of narrowly
   focussed plagues, the revelation on Sinai with its attendant visions,
   talking mules, the falling of Manna, revivification of the dead, and
   many, many others. Traditional Judaism, in accepting Torah as G-d's
   word, accepts that these things happened, even though western science
   can't currently (and may never) explain them.
   
   As Rabbi Kaplan (z"l) wrote in his Handbook of Jewish Thought,
   paraphrasing Rabbi Elchanan Wasserman (z"l):
   
     "Science does not contradict, or even concern itself with miracles.
     Science deals with the laws of nature, while miracles are, by
     definition, exceptions to those laws. Any disbelief in miracles is
     thus not scientific, but is based on arbitrary prejudices in
     conformity to popular styles of thought. Such a disbelief can
     reduce a person's concept of G-d to a mere abstract philosophical
     idea, abolishing the obligation to serve and obey Him."
     
   In addition, there are traditional Jewish sources (primarily in the
   Kabbalah) that explain the roles that angels and demons play in the
   world, the Jewish version of astrology, and the mechanisms through
   which miracles occur.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.14: What do Jews hope/expect of the future?

Answer:
   
   Traditional Jews hope for the arrival of the Messiah and the
   accompanying age. (See the above question on the Messiah.) Some
   liberal Jews reject the concept of a Messiah, but still hope that man
   will create the same type of moral world that the traditional Jews
   believe the arrival of the Messiah will usher in. Traditional Jews
   also expect the revival of the dead at the end of days along with
   G-d's presence manifested on Earth.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.15: How can Jews reject (insert true belief here)?

Answer:
   
   Usually, it is because the beliefs of those religions contradict
   fundamental tenets of Judaism. Occasionally, liberal movements may use
   some meditative approaches from other religions, but there is no
   belief in the other religion's belief system.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.16: Why do Jews need organized religion or Jewish laws?
         Isn't it good enough to be a good person? How about gentiles?

Answer:
   
   Traditional Jews believe in absolute morality backed by G-d's
   authority, and liberal Jews tend to hold similar moral principles,
   even if doubting their divine origin. Thus, "good" implies "observes
   those moral principles that one is obligated to follow."
   
   According to Judaism, gentiles have seven categories of mitzvot that
   they must follow, and do not need Jewish law or organized religion.
   But it's their privilege to organize to worship, should they so
   choose. See the answer in Section 12.19 for more information on these
   categories.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.17: How does Judaism differ from Xianity, Marxism,
         Communism, Humanism and other -isms?

Answer:
   
   Communism and Marxism are discredited fin-de-siecle (late 19th
   century) atheistic philosophies in which people are grouped by
   economic class, seen as the primary force of history. In contrast,
   Judaism postulates a set of overriding moral principles, which
   traditional Jews believe came from G-d, and recognizes the power of
   righteous and evil individuals.
   
   Humanism places man above all else. Judaism places G-d above all else,
   especially above mankind. "Jewish Humanism" usually describes the
   combination of elements of Eastern European (Jewish) culture and an
   atheistic absolute moral code which just so happens to be very similar
   to Judaism's. For more details, see the Humanistic Reading List.
   
   Judaism rejects the possibility of G-d assuming human form. (See
   Talmud Yerushalmi, tractate Taanis 2:1 (9a) from Bamidbar [Numbers]
   23:19). Judaism also rejects the concept of a mandatory mediator
   between G-d and man, although it accepts the idea that one person can
   petition G-d on behalf of others. Branches of Xianity postulate
   salvation exclusively through faith, while Judaism requires observance
   of the commandments, irrespective of one's level of faith.
   
   For more detail, see question 4 in Prager and Telushikin's The Nine
   Questions People Ask About Judaism (Simon and Schuster, 1981, page 77)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.18: Where can a Gentile learn about Judaism?

Answer:
   
   A good place to start is Dennis Prager and Joseph Telushkin's The Nine
   Questions People Ask About Judaism, Simon and Schuster, New York, NY,
   1981.
   
   Because major questions about Judaism are answered in this and other
   similar books, gentiles who post "I'm just curious about why Jews
   reject my faith" will be assumed to be missionaries until proven
   otherwise. Too many missionaries have posted, pretending to ask
   objective, curious questions, only to end up preaching to the group.
   
   Additional information may be found in the General Judaism Reading
   List, available at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/gen-index.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 12.19: What does Judaism say about non-Jews and their role?
         What does G-d demands of gentiles to get to Olam Ha'aba ["The World-
         to-come"]? What are the Noachide laws?

Answer:
   
    Background Information
    
   The Rabbis in Tractate Sanhedrin [57a] [derive from the Torah] the six
   broad categories of laws that G-d forbids all of humanity:
   
    1. Killing
    2. Stealing
    3. Committing Sexual Immorality
    4. Eating the flesh of a living animal
    5. Serving idols
    6. Blaspheming against G-d
       
   They also derived one positive category of laws:
   
    1. Establishing a system of legal justice
       
   This gives rise to the common expression of "seven" laws. According to
   the standard computation, these break down into 66 laws that non-Jews
   are obligated to observe. According to the Rambam, in order to merit
   the World to Come, non-Jews must observe these obligations
   specifically because they were commanded by G-d through the Torah (see
   Genesis 9). [References: R' Shlomo Riskin, R' Nathan Cardozo Torah,
   Masorah, and Man, and Mishneh Torah, Hilkhot Melakhim 8:11]
   
   A common question on s.c.j is "What are these laws?". The following is
   a condensed version of a summary of the laws and categories put
   together by Shlomoh Sherman and posted by Moshe Shulman:
   
    The Seven Noachide Categories
    
    1. Murder is forbidden: The life of a human being, formed in G-d's
       image, is sacred.
    2. Theft is forbidden. The world is not ours to do with as we please.
    3. Incestuous and adulterous relations are forbidden. Human beings
       are not sexual objects, nor is pleasure the ultimate goal of life.
    4. Eating the flesh of a living animal is forbidden. This teaches us
       to be sensitive to cruelty to animals. (This was commanded to Noah
       for the first time along with the permission of eating meat. The
       negative laws were enforced at the Garden of Eden.)
    5. Idolatry is forbidden: Man is commanded to believe in the One G-d
       alone and worship only G-d.
    6. Cursing the name of G-d is forbidden. Besides honoring and
       respecting G-d, we learn from this precept that our speech must be
       sanctified, as that is the distinctive sign that separated man
       from the animals.
    7. Mankind is commanded to establish courts of justice and a just
       social order. This is in order to enforce the first six laws and
       enact any other useful laws or customs.
       
    Specific References
    
   These categories are felt to be implicit in God's commandment to Adam
   and Eve in Genesis (Bereshis) 2:16-17:
    1. The following verse is a reference to the prohibition against
       murder. God explicitly commands Noah (Genesis 9:6), "If one sheds
       the blood of the man (HaAdam), by man shall his own blood be
       shed."
    2. The following is an implicit reference to the prohibition against
       theft. It shows that permission is needed to take something that
       is not explicitly yours. "You shall not steal; you shall not deal
       deceitfully or falsely with one another" (Leviticus 19:11).
    3. The below verse refers to sexual misconduct or adultery, as the
       prophet Jeremiah (3:1) says, "Saying (laymor), if a man divorces
       his wife..."
    4. The following verse implies that there are things which may not be
       eaten (the limbs of a live animal): "You must not, however, eat
       flesh with its life- blood in it." (Genesis 9:4)
    5. The following verse is a reference to the prohibition against
       idolatry; for it says in Exodus 20:3, "You shall have no other
       gods before me."
    6. The following verse implies the prohibition against blasphemy. As
       it says in Leviticus 24:16, "He who blasphemes the name of the
       Lord (Hashem) shall die."
    7. What follows is a reference to laws of justice for it says in
       Genesis 18:19, "For I have known him so he will command (Yitzaveh)
       his children after him to keep the way of the Lord and
       righteousness and justice."
       
    Seven Turns Into Sixty-Six
    
   From this are derived the following 66 laws:
   
    1. MURDER: (1) against anyone murdering anyone.
    2. THEFT: (1) against stealing; (2) against committing robbery (3)
       against shifting a landmark; (4) against cheating; (5) against
       repudiating a claim of money owed; (6) against overcharging; (7)
       against coveting; (8) against desiring; (9) a laborer shall be
       allowed to eat of the fruits among which he works (under certain
       conditions); (10) against a laborer eating of such fruit (when
       certain conditions are not met); (11) against a laborer taking of
       such fruit home; (12) against kidnapping; (13) against the use of
       false weights and measures; (14) against the possession of false
       weights and measures; (15) that one shall be exact in the use of
       weights and measures; and (16) that the robber shall return (or
       pay for) the stolen object.
    3. ILLICIT INTERCOURSE: (1) against (a man) having union with his
       mother; (2) against (a man) having union with his sister; (3)
       against (a man) having union with the wife of his father; (4)
       against (a man) having union with another man's wife; (5) against
       (a man) copulating with a beast; (6) against a woman copulating
       with a beast; (7) against (a man) lying carnally with a male; (8)
       against (a man) lying carnally with his father; (9) against (a
       man) lying carnally with his father's brother; and (10) against
       engaging in erotic conduct that may lead to a prohibited union.
       [Note: There is some dispute as to what the correct wording it for
       (8) and (9), as it seems to be covered by (7). If the text is
       based on Lev. 18:8, the standard prohibition derived therefrom is
       covered in (3). Note that this is in the context of noachide
       prohibitions.]
    4. LIMB OF A LIVING CREATURE: (1) against eating a limb severed from
       a living animal, beast, or fowl; and (2) against eating the flesh
       of any animal which was torn by a wild beast ... which, in part,
       prohibits the eating of such flesh as was torn off an animal while
       it was still alive.
    5. IDOLATRY: (1) against entertaining the thought that there exists a
       deity except the Lord; (2) against making any graven image (and
       against having anyone else make one for us); (3) against making
       idols for use by others; (4) against making any forbidden statues
       (even when they are for ornamental purposes); (5) against bowing
       to any idol (and not to sacrifice nor to pour libation nor to burn
       incense before any idol, even where it is not the customary manner
       of worship to the particular idol); (6) against worshipping idols
       in any of their customary manners of worship; (7) against causing
       our children to pass (through the fire) in the worship of Molech
       [Molech was the fire god of the Ammonites and Phoenicians to whom
       parents sacrificed their children]; (8) against practicing Ov; (9)
       against the practice of Yiddoni [Sorceror, Soothsayer, Magician];
       and (10) against turning to idolatry (in word, in thought, in
       deed, or by any observance that may draw us to its worship).
       [Editors Note: We need a translation/meaning for Ov.]
    6. BLASPHEMY: (1) to acknowledge the presence of God; (2) to fear
       God; (3) to pray to G-d; (4) to sanctify God's name (in face of
       death, where appropriate); (5) against desecrating God's name
       (even in face of death, when appropriate); (6) to study the Torah;
       (7) to honor the scholars, and to revere one's teacher; and (8)
       against blaspheming.
    7. JUSTICE: (1) to appoint judges and officers in each and every
       community; (2) to treat the litigants equally before the law; (3)
       to inquire diligently into the testimony of a witness; (4) against
       the wanton miscarriage of justice by the court; (5) against the
       judge accepting a bribe or gift from a litigant; (6) against the
       judge showing marks of honor to but one litigant; (7) against the
       judge acting in fear of a litigant's threats; (8) against the
       judge, out of compassion, favoring a poor litigant; (9) against
       the judge discriminating against the litigant because he is a
       sinner; (10) against the judge, out of softness, putting aside the
       penalty of a mauler or killer; (11) against the judge
       discriminating against a stranger or an orphan; (12) against the
       judge hearing one litigant in the absence of the other; (13)
       against appointing a judge who lacks knowledge of the Law; (14)
       against the court killing an innocent man; (15) against
       incrimination by circumstantial evidence; (16) against punishing
       for a crime committed under duress; (17) that the court is to
       administer the death penalty by the sword; (18) against anyone
       taking the law into his own hands to kill the perpetrator of a
       capital crime (this point is disagreed upon by different writers:
       "The Noahites are not restricted in this way but may judge singly
       and at once."); (19) to testify in court; and (20) against
       testifying falsely.
       
    Appendix
    
   The term "Noachide" describes groups, generally founded by rabbis, for
   the purpose of making non-Jews aware of their obligations according to
   Torah. These groups observe the commandments in the seven categories,
   and do not follow the tenets of non-Jewish religions.
   
   The following locations include B'nai Noach Groups or Organizations
   (United States):

     * CALIFORNIA
         1. Noah's Covenant Noachide Ministry [1827 Ximeno Avenue, #237,
            Long Beach, California 90815. E-mail: Noahide@exo.com.
            Website: http://www.noahide.com].

     * FLORIDA
         1. Ex-Christians For Moses Noahide Ministry [1000 West Oakland
            Park Boulevard, Suite 105, Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33311.
            E-mail: cfmbnainoach@hotmail.com. Website:
            http://www.freeyellow.com/members5/Cfmbnainoach].

     * GEORGIA
         1. Chavurath B'nai Noach of Atlanta, Georgia [3952 Garden
            Circle, Acworth, Georgia 30101. Phone & Fax (Local): (770)
            975-0225. Phone & Fax (International): (800) 929-6624.
            E-mail: bnainoah@atl.bellsouth.net. Website:
            http://www.bnainoach.com].

     * ILLINOIS
         1. B'nai Noach Study Group [E-mail: ABZadok@aol.com].

     * MASSACHUSETTS
         1. Chavurath B'nai Noach of Massachusetts [30 North Hadley Road,
            Amherst, Massachusetts 01002. E-mail: BneiNoach@i-rip.com].

     * MINNESOTA
         1. B'nai Noach Study Group [E-mail: Rabbi@RabbiFriedman.org].

     * NEW YORK
         1. Root & Branch Association [860 Grand Concourse, Bronx, New
            York 10451. Phone: (718) 585-3512, Fax: (718) 993-3712.
            Email: rb@rb.org.il].

     * TENNESSEE
         1. Emmanuel Study Centre for B'nai Noah [POB 442 Athens,
            Tennessee 37371- 0442. Phone: (423) 745-0851, Fax: (423)
            744-9414. E-mail: Yethro@aol.com and BenNoah007@aol.com.
            Website: http://www.noach.com/emmanuel].

     * TEXAS
         1. Chavurath B'nai Noah of Fort Worth, Texas [8029 Hulen Park
            Circle, Fort Worth, Texas 76123-1353. Phone: (817) 370-9126,
            Fax: (817) 370-0023. E-mail: bneinoah@fastlane.net. Website:
            http://www.fastlane.net/~bneinoah].
         2. Vendyl Jones Research Institutes [POB 120366 Arlington, Texas
            76012-0366. Phone (USA): (817) 792-3304, Fax (USA): (817)
            275-6317. Phone (Israel): (972) 2-535-7598, Fax (Israel):
            (972) 2-535-7597. E-mail: vjri@onramp.net. Website:
            http://www.vendyljones.org.il].

     * WISCONSIN
         1. B'nai Noach Study Group [E-mail: Noachide1@juno.com. Website:
            http://www.freeyellow.com/members5/HRUBIESZOW/index.html].
       
   The following is a list of books pertaining specifically to B'nai
   Noach. Unless otherwise indicated, books should be available through
   major online retailers.:
    1. Benamozegh, Elijah; Luria, Maxwell (Translator). Israel and
       Humanity (Classics of Western Spirituality). Paulist Press; 1995.
       Paperback ISBN 0-809135-41-8.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809135418/socculturejewish
       /] 
    2. Bindman, Yirmeyahu. (The) Seven Colors of the Rainbow: Torah
       Ethics for Non-Jews. Resource Publications; 1995. Paperback. ISBN
       0-893903-32-9.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0893903329/socculturejewish
       ] 
    3. Clorfene, Chaim and Yaakov Rogalsky. The Path of the Righteous
       Gentile. Smithfield, MI: Targum Press, 1987
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087306433X/socculturejewish
       ] (Special Order)
    4. Davis, J. David. Finding the God of Noah: The Spiritual Journey of
       a Baptist Minister from Christianity to the Laws of Noah. Ktav
       Publishing House; 1996. Hardcover ISBN 0-881255-35-1.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0881255351/socculturejewish
       /] 
    5. Friedman, Manis. Doesn't Anyone Blush Anymore? Bais Chana Press.
       Paperback ISBN 1-578870-00-3.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578870003/socculturejewish
       /] 
    6. Gallin, Aryeh. The Root and Branch Noachide Guide. Root and Branch
       Association, Ltd. 504 Grand Street, #E51, New York, NY 10002-4101.
       http://www.rb.org.il/
    7. Hanke, Kimberly E. Turning to Torah: The Emerging Noachide
       Movement Jason Aronson Publishing House (230 Livingston Street,
       Northvale, New Jersey 07647) and Number Seven Spectrum House
       (32-34 Gordon House Road London, NW5 1LP England). 1995. 250 pp.
       ISBN: 1-568215-00-2. [One woman's path from Christianity to
       "Messianic" Christianity, and finally to Torah since 1988. At one
       point, she considers conversion to Judaism, and then learns of the
       Noachide Covenant, through several Jewish individuals. She then
       was enlightened into the writings of J. David Davis.]
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1568215002/socculturejewish
       ] 
    8. Kaplan, Jeffrey. Radical Religion in America: Millenarian
       Movements from the Far Right to the Children of Noah. Syracuse
       Univ Pr (Trade); 1997. Paperback ISBN 0-815603-96-7.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0815603967/socculturejewish
       ] 
    9. Lichtenstein, Aaron. The Seven Laws of Noah. The Rabbi Jacob
       Joseph School Press, New York. 1981. Website:
       http://www.judaica.com/Noah/seven.html [The most technical book on
       Noahism. It is probably not intended to be an introduction to the
       Noahide system, but rather a detailed scholarly analysis for those
       who have been Noahides for a long time or for Jewish scholars of
       Noahism.]
   10. Madden, Ralph. Israel: The Abiding Kingdom. Available at
       http://jibp.israel.net/page13.html.
   11. Novak, David. (The) Image of the Non-Jew in Judaism: A
       Constructive Study of the Noahide Laws. Edwin Mellen Press; 1983.
       Hardcover ISBN 0-889467-59-5.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0889467595/socculturejewish
       /] 
   12. Pallire, Aim. The Unknown Sanctuary: A Pilgrimage from Rome to
       Israel. Bloch Pub Co; 1986. Paperback ISBN 0-819704-98-9.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0819704989/socculturejewish
       ] 
   13. Schonfeld, S. Universal Bible To All Nations: Torat B'nai Noach
       (Teachings for Sons of Noah) Website:
       http://www.noach.com/emmanuel/catalog/books.htm.
   14. Sears, David. Compassion For Humanity In the Jewish Tradition.
       Jason Aronson; 1998. Hardcover. ISBN 0-765799-87-1.
       [Buy at Amazon:
       http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0765799871/socculturejewish
       /] 
       
    Discussion Lists
    
    1. ONElist Noachide - To subscribe, e-mail
       Noachide-subscribe@onelist.com with the subject and body with the
       word "subscribe" (without the quotes).
    2. EGroups Noahide - To subscribe, e-mail
       noahides-subscribe@egroups.com with the subject and body with the
       word "subscribe" (without the quotes).
    3. EGroups B'nai Noach - To subscribe, e-mail
       bn_general-subscribe@egroups.com with the subject and body with
       the word "subscribe" (without the quotes).
    4. EGroups B'nai Noach (Moderated) - To subscribe, e-mail
       bn_moderated-subscribe@egroups.com with the word "subscribe"
       (without the quotes).
    5. B'nai Noach Discussion Forum:
       http://www.insidetheweb.com/mbs.cgi/mb279257
       
    Additional Information
    
   To obtain additional details on the above or to have your question(s)
   about Noahism answered, e-mail JewishCo1@aol.com with your request.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.09.09 06:33


End of SCJ FAQ Part 6 (Jewish Thought) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:06 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yf-000OVpC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:05 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05103
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:22:00 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id F18B27A154
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:10 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id CE3417A143
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:09 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28089 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:34 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:34 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032534.28088.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 07-Jews-As-Nation
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 46981
Lines: 899

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Jews As A Nation (7/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.7>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/07-Jews-As-Nation
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Questions about the Jewish Nation
Message-ID: <faq.7_970596421@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/07-Jews-As-Nation
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.07-Jews-As-Nation
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
                           Part 7: Jews as a Nation
                    [Last Post: Tue Oct  3 11:07:05 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                Section 13:
                              Jews as a Nation
                                      
    1. What are the different racial and cultural groups of Jews? 
    2. What are the differences between Sephardim and Ashkenazim? 
    3. Where did the Beita Yisrael (Falashas) come from? 
    4. Who were the Khazars? Are Ashkenazi Jews descended from the
       Khazars? 
    5. Who are Crypto-Jews (also known as "marranos")? 
    6. How does the Sephardi/Ashkenazi differences differ from the O/C/R
       differences? 
    7. I've heard of a group called the "Black Hebrews". Who are they? 
    8. What about the black jews in South Africa? 
    9. Who Are The Jews of India, And What Are Their Origins? 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.1: What are the different racial and cultural groups of
         Jews?

Answer:
   
   The Jewish religion is practiced by people of diverse racial and
   ethnic backgrounds, as a result of the continual process of conversion
   to Judaism. Thus, Jews today are a mixture of descendants of converts
   as well as direct descendants of ancient Israelite Jews. You cannot
   determine who is a Jew based solely on name, racial characteristics,
   or any other physical characteristics (including circumcision, for
   much of the male general population undergos this procedure).
   
   Among North American Jews, individuals of Eastern European Ashkenazi
   heritage are predominant, although before the late 1800's, individuals
   of Sephardi origin (i.e. Jews who settled around the Mediterranean
   basin at the time of the diaspora) were more common.
   
   Other groups of Jews include the Arab and Yemeni Jews. In fact, there
   was a Jewish kingdom in Yemen in the early Middle Ages under the rule
   of Dhu Nuwas. There are also Jews of Persian origin. The larger groups
   of non-Caucasian Jews include the Jews from Ethiopia.
   
   Other Jewish communities include the Kaifeng Jews of China (now mostly
   assimilated). Until 1960, there was a community of cave-dwelling Jews
   in southern Libya. A community in Burma claimed to be Jews, and rumors
   and legends abound about African, Native American, and other tribes
   claiming Jewish ancestry. There are also Jewish communities in India.
   
   A 20th-century convert community, the Abayudaya Jews, exists in
   Uganda, Africa.
   
   Jews may be white or black. No one knows the skin color of the
   patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We do know that there was some
   mixing between the Jewish and the Hamatic nations. Some biblical
   scholars believe that Abraham was half-Chaldean; there is some
   evidence that the Chaldeans were black. The point of this: to
   reiterate what was said at the beginning of this answer: You cannot
   determine who is a Jew based solely on name, racial characteristics,
   or any other physical characteristics (including circumcision, for
   much of the male general population undergos this procedure).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.2: What are the differences between Sephardim and
         Ashkenazim?

Answer:
   
   They came from different cultures, and so particular customs developed
   differently, such as details of the prayer service and permitted foods
   on Pesach. The Shulchan Aruch by R' Joseph Karo is the definitive
   Sephardic work on halacha, and R' Moshe Isserles later added glosses
   to describe Ashkenazi practice. Other works describe the customs and
   practices of particular communities.
   
   Many of the customs (minhag) are derived from the communities in which
   these groups arose. The customs of Ashkenazi Jews often resemble those
   of the Slavs and Germans, because the Ashkenazi Jews were concentrated
   in that region. Additional information may be found in Paul Wexler's
   book The Ashkenazic Jews by Slavica Publishers.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.3: Where did the Beita Yisrael (Falashas) come from?

Answer:
   
   First off, know that "Falasha" (Amharic for "stranger") is considered
   very derogatory. Just say "Ethiopian Jew" if you can't remember "Beita
   Yisrael." Older reference books will probably list them under
   "Falasha," i.e. the 1972 article in the Encyclopaedia Judaica.
   
   Their own legends date them back to Shlomo ha-melech [King Solomon],
   and ascribe their origin to the tribe of Dan. See the book The Lost
   Jews by Rappoport.
   
   Researchers also think some of the defeated Yemenite Jews from the Abu
   Duwas Jewish Kingdom came to Ethiopia, and that some Elephantine Jews
   migrated south from Egypt. Another Ethiopian legend has one of Moses'
   sons migrating South and establishing a Hebrew community before King
   Solomon.
   
   You can learn more about Ethiopian Jewry and their rich history and
   culture on the Ethiopian Jewry WWW Homepage at
   <http://www.cais.com/nacoej>.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.4: Who were the Khazars? Are Ashkenazi Jews descended
         from the Khazars?

Answer:
   
   The Khazars were a Turkic tribe that migrated to the steppes of what
   is today southern Russia and eastern Ukraine by the 5th century. They
   established a powerful kingdom that existed from the mid-7th century
   until the early-11th century. The Khazars had a two-king system,
   consisting of a military king (bek) and a sacral king (khaqan). The
   Khazar army, which took orders from the bek and the military commander
   (tarkhan), included tens of thousands of professional soldiers.
   
   The Khazars were a potent military force in eastern Europe till about
   the middle of the 11th century, their last power base being the
   Crimean peninsula. In the 7th and 8th centuries, they defeated the
   Eastern Caliphate in several key battles, thus halting the spread of
   Islam north of the Caucasus mountain range, much the same as what the
   Carolingian rulers did to the Western Caliphate at the Pyrenees.
   (Ironically, these Jewish converts made Eastern Europe safe for
   Christianity.) The Khazars gained control over major waterways such as
   the Caspian Sea, the Volga River, and the Dnieper River. The Khazar
   kings collected tribute from many of the East Slavic tribes as well as
   from traders traversing their country. Large garrisons were stationed
   at hill-forts located at strategic points throughout the kingdom
   (e.g., Kiev by the Dnieper, Sarkel by the Don, Samandar by the
   Caspian) to guard against enemy invaders such as the Rus.
   
   The king of the Khazars learned the Torah with the assistance of the
   Jewish preacher Isaac Sangari, whose existence has recently been
   verified (by the discovery of poems authored by Sangari in the
   Firkovitch collection of manuscripts). In the 9th century, the
   Khazarian kings and nobles officially converted to Judaism. Surrounded
   by the Islamic Eastern Caliphate of Persia and the Christian Byzantine
   Empire, the Khazars may have chosen Judaism as their state religion to
   avoid being religiously (and hence politically) dominated by either
   empire, so that they could avoid being labelled as heathens while at
   the same time remaining independent of their powerful neighbors. By
   the start of the 10th century, Judaism gained a stronghold among the
   common Khazar people, and the Hebrew script came into use in Khazaria.
   However, most of the soldiers in the Khazar army were Muslims, and the
   non-Khazar ethnic groups within the Khazar Empire (such as the Slavs,
   Bulgars, and Goths) did not adopt Judaism but rather remained pagans,
   Muslims, and Christians.
   
   Arab travelogues provide useful contemporary details about the life of
   the Khazars. Armenian, Slavic, and Hebrew sources also form the core
   of our knowledge about the Khazar people. Important Hebrew primary
   sources are:
    1. The Khazar Correspondence between Khaqan Joseph and Hasdai ibn
       Shaprut of Spain, now known to be authentic.
    2. The Schechter Letter, found in the Cairo Genizah, an account of
       the conversion of Khazars to Judaism, the migration of Jews to
       Khazaria, and the military victories of the Khazars.
    3. The Kievan Letter, found in the Cairo Genizah, written by the
       Khazar Jews of Kiev in the early 10th century.
       
   Within the past few decades, archaeological excavations in Russia and
   Ukraine have unearthed Khazar jewelry, pottery, gravesites, and
   tombstones containing engraved menorahs and Turkic tribe symbols. One
   of the most famous sites was Sarkel, which in 1952 was flooded for a
   dam by the Soviet government and is not available for further
   research. Other major Khazarian archaeological sites include Verkhneye
   Chiryurt (Balanjar, in Daghestan), Verkhneye Saltovo and Mayaki
   hill-fort (near the Don and Donets rivers), and Kerch and Sudak (on
   the Crimea). For several years, archaeologists have been trying to
   locate the precise site of the Khazar capital of Itil; some believe
   the wall which surrounded Itil has been found underwater, while others
   associate Itil with a hill in the Volga delta region called Samosdelka
   (south of Astrakhan).
   
   Secondary sources include:

     * The Kuzari by Yehuda HaLevi, a 12th century religious work using
       the story of the Khazars as justification for Judaism in the face
       of intense missionary pressure especially in Spain. The Kuzari was
       originally written in Arabic, but many excellent Hebrew and
       English translations have been published.

     * "The History of the Jewish Khazars" by Douglas M. Dunlop (New
       York: Schocken Books, 1967).

     * "The Thirteenth Tribe: The Khazar Empire and Its Heritage" by
       Arthur Koestler (New York: Random House, 1976).

     * "Khazar Studies: An Historico-Philological Inquiry into the
       Origins of the Khazars" by Peter Golden (Budapest: Akademiai
       Kiado, 1980).

     * "Khazarian Hebrew Documents of the Tenth Century" by Omeljan
       Pritsak (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press, 1982).

     * "The Jews of Khazaria" by Kevin A. Brook (Northvale, NJ: Jason
       Aronson, 1999).
       
   Are Ashkenazi Jews descended from the Khazars? To a certain extent. An
   important Khazar community remained in Kiev, and family oral
   traditions indicate the persistence of Khazar Jewish communities in
   Hungary, Transylvania, Lithuania, and central Ukraine. Some Jews have
   features that might be considered almost Mongolian or Oriental.
   However, there is no remnant of Khazar custom among Ashkenazi Jews,
   and there are only a few Ashkenazi surnames (e.g., Balaban) and
   Yiddish words (e.g., yarmulke) which derive from Turkic. It is
   sometimes suggested that the surname Kogan derives from Khaqan, but
   the more likely derivation is from Kohen (meaning "Israelite priest");
   the Ukrainians and Belarusians use the letter h, but in Russian h
   becomes g, as may be seen in such examples as Grodno-Hrodna and
   Girsch-Hirsch.
   
   It seems that after the fall of their kingdom, the Khazars adopted the
   Cyrillic script in place of Hebrew and began to speak East Slavic
   (sometimes called "Canaanic" because Benjamin of Tudela called Kievan
   Rus the "Land of Canaan"). These Slavic-speaking Jews are documented
   to have lived in Kievan Rus during the 11th-13th centuries. However,
   Yiddish-speaking Jewish immigrants from the west (especially Germany,
   Bohemia, and other areas of Central Europe) soon began to flood into
   Eastern Europe, and it is believed that these newer immigrants
   eventually outnumbered the Khazars. Thus, Eastern European Jews
   predominantly have ancestors who came from Central Europe rather than
   from the Khazar kingdom. The two groups (eastern and western Jews)
   intermarried over the centuries.
   
   The Ashkenazi Jews are also the direct descendants of the Israelites.
   Genetic tests seem to indicate some ancestry from the regions known
   today as Turkey, Armenia, Georgia, and Iraq. Mediterranean Fever, for
   example, is found among some Ashkenazi Jews as well as Armenians and
   Anatolian Turks. It is now asserted that many Ashkenazi men who belong
   to the priestly caste (Kohenim) possess a "Kohen" marker on the
   Y-chromosome.
   
   Some descendants of the Khazars may still live in the north Caucasus
   among the Kumuks and the Balkars. Many Muslim Khazars settled in
   Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan and may have intermarried with Oghuz and
   Kipchak Turks.
   
   If you are interested in the subject of Khazar Jews, you can visit the
   Khazaria Information Center at <http://www.khazaria.com>.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.5: Who are Crypto-Jews (also known as "marranos")?

Answer:
   
   At the time of the Spanish Inquisition and the expulsion from Spain in
   1492, Jews were offered conversion or expulsion. Many chose to leave
   Spain (quite a few found safety in the Muslim Ottoman Empire), but
   others stayed behind.
   
   "Marranos" actually started appearing with the first riots in the
   Juderias of Spain. Many were forced to convert to save their lives.
   These were naturally not faithful Catholics. The laws in 14th and 15th
   century Spain became increasingly oppressive towards practicing Jews,
   while providing an easy escape by conversion. Large numbers of middle
   class Jews outwardly took on Christianity to avoid the laws, while
   secretly practicing Judaism. [The term Marrano appears to be derived
   from the color of the robes of a Roman Catholic Bishop; Jews who
   converted were placed under the direct tutelage of that bishop]
   
   Most of the remaining Marranic practice in Spain and Portugal today is
   from those religious Jews who escaped from Spain to Portugal in 1492,
   only to be trapped there later when the expulsion was instituted there
   as well. The most active Marranism in the Iberian peninsula is in the
   mountainous border areas between Spain and Portugal, in towns such as
   Belmonte'. Jewish outreach in these areas is achieving success in
   bringing them forward and restoring full Judaic practice, but many
   still fear burning or other persecution if they go public.
   
   Some faithful Catholic converts were won by the efforts of famous
   apostates like Pablo de Santa Maria who went around disputing the
   rabbis and ordinary Jews, winning some converts. In the most famous
   disputation, with Nachmanides, he was soundly defeated, but the
   Franciscans published false reports of the disputation to win more
   converts. Nachmanides, who had been protected from heresy laws during
   the disputations, was forced to publish his refutations in public. He
   was forced into exile rather than be burned as a heretic. In any case,
   the faithfulness of these converts is doubtful, since the Order of
   Expulsion was primarily due to the recidivism of Conversos once they
   had to live next door to practicing Jews again. It was felt that
   expelling all open Jews was the only way to keep the Conversos
   Christian.
   
   Among those who stayed behind were Jews who pretended to convert to
   Roman Catholicism, but who secretly maintained a practice of Judaism.
   The term "Marrano" was at one time used to describe them, as the term
   refers to the swine which they'd publicly eat to demonstrate their
   outward conversion. It isn't clear if the "Old Christians" or the
   practicing Jews called them "marrano".
   
   In Majorca the community was converted in the 1430's and are called
   Chuetas, from "pork lard" since they regularly keep pork lard boiling
   in cauldrons on their porches. They themselves still call themselves
   Israelitas in private, and ask forgiveness from el Grande Dio for
   worshipping in front of statues of a man. They typically sacrified (in
   a figurative, not literal, sense) their first born sons to the
   Catholic priesthood as a means of getting protection from Church
   persecution, so, ironically, many of the priests across the Baleiric
   Islands are from Marrano families.
   
   Crypto-Jew is the correct term, as it also refers to Jews forced to
   adopt other religions and political philosophies while maintaining
   Jewish practices. Crypto-Judaism pre-dates the Inquisition, as Jews
   were forced by the Al-Mohavid invasions of Spain to become Muslims,
   creating Crypto-Jews who gradually fled to Christian districts for
   protection from the Muslims (see Roth's History of the Jews). In
   modern times outwardly Muslim Crypto-Jews are known to be in Meshed,
   Iran, and in Turkey.
   
   A number of Crypto-Jewish communities survive today, especially in
   former Spanish-influenced regions, such as the southwestern U.S.A.
   They still maintain extensive secrecy after centuries. Other
   communities were lost to assimilation, but maintained residual Jewish
   practices such as lighting candles Friday night. Cohen's The Marranos
   and Prinz's The Secret Jews claim that the following are examples of
   such communities, although such claims have not been verified and are
   disputed by some:

     * The Antiquen~as of Colombia.

     * Much of Northern Mexico's middle and upper classes (Nuevo Leon is
       the "New Lion of Judah"). Note: Some note that Neuvo Leon mean was
       named after the old Leon in Spain. However, whatever the origin of
       the name, many of the families of Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, have
       managed to keep in their memory, after more than 400 years, their
       Separdic origin.

     * The Naucalpan and Vallejo districts of Mexico City. (Technically,
       Naucalpan is not in the Distrito Federal, but in the greater
       metropolitan area).

     * The Chuetas of Majorca. A look at Chueta last names shows many
       surnames which have became quite famous in the Hispanic world.
       They include Mir, Miro, and Marti. Of course Joan Miro was
       Mallorcan. Any marranism in Fidel Castro's family would be through
       his mother, as his father's family was Gallego, and very few Jews
       ever lived in Galicia (of course plenty lived in the Austrian
       Galicia, I'm refering to northwestern Spain ). Interesting about
       the mountains on the Spanish-Portuguese border being a hotbed of
       marranism, particularly those on the Extremadura-Andalucia border.
       This area is directly inland from some of the areas which
       contained the earliest Jewish communities on the Iberian peninsula
       - for example Huelva and Gibraltar. Malaga and Almunecar - which
       also had early communities - are also in Andalucia. According to
       Timothy Mitchell's book Flamenco: Deep Song and other sources, the
       inquisition in western Andalucia was slightly more lenient than
       elsewhere because of the need for labour related for the new world
       trade and mining. The connections are quite interesting.
       
   Famous Hispanics who have acknowledged Marrano ancestry include Rita
   Moreno and Fidel Castro. Jews have played an important role in the
   history of Monterrey, Mexico. Frida Kahlo's father, Guillermo Kahlo, a
   somewhat reknowned photographer in his own right, was a Hungarian Jew.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.6: How does the Sephardi/Ashkenazi differences differ
         from the O/C/R differences?

Answer:
   
   Traditional Sephardic and Ashkenazic Jews agree that the oral and
   written Torah are from G-d, and that the sages may rule on halachic
   matters. The differences in practice are mostly in culture and
   customs. Traditional and liberal Jews disagree on the Divine origin of
   the oral and written Torah, and on the ability of present-day sages
   and secular scholars to overrule earlier halachic decisors.
   
   Also, Sephardic Jews tend not to separate along "denominational"
   lines, but rather "observant" and "non-observant."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.7: I've heard of a group called the "Black Hebrews". Who
         are they?

Answer:
   
   The answer depends on where you are talking about. First, note that
   the term "Black Hebrews" is not appreciated (although used) by most
   individuals in such communiites. The term is used only because they
   were branded with the name by the predominantly White media some
   decades ago. The problems with the term is that it normalizes the
   "Whiteness" of the Jewish/Hebrew people. The groups actually refer to
   themselves as "Hebrews", "Israelites" and in many cases,
   "Hebrew-Israelites."

     * In Israel:
       First, note that there are many "black" Jews in Israel that are
       properly affiliated with Judaism--in all movements--including
       Orthodoxy. Many were converted generations ago and their
       descendants deserve the same credibility given to any child born
       of a Jewish mother-converted or otherwise. In the eyes of Judaism,
       it is whether you are a Jew, and not your skin color, that
       matters.
       However, in Israel, there are groups calling themselves "Black
       Hebrews" that are African Americans, not Ethiopian Jews, who moved
       to Israel in late 60's-early-70's. There is a wide variety of
       "Black Hebrew" practices in Israel. Some are Torah Israelites,
       some ascribe to "the whole bible", and some claim they are Torah
       based. Some of the misunderstandings about the nature of these
       groups arises from the particularity of African-American religious
       sensibilities, which themselves arise out of fundamentally
       different experiences than those of any other American group.
       Thus, the categorical boundaries that apply to Euro-Americans
       (i.e., Christian or Jew, Muslim or Christian) cannot be so easily
       applied to the African-American religious traditions. This
       partially explains why these groups identify with ancient culture
       and not the religion of Judaism.
       Some groups called "Black Hebrew" Israel (but which are really
       not) practice a fundamentalist form of Christianity, but do not
       consider themselves Christians or Jews, but Hebrews, "true"
       decendants of the "Hebrew race". For example, they fast on
       Shabbat, and are strict vegetarians, to name a couple of examples.
       They have a large community in Dimona in the Negev, and they often
       hold jazz concerts throughout the country. They recently received
       permanent residency status, and official citizenship is soon to
       follow.
       Many African American Hebrews practice Kashruth, circumcise their
       male children, observe Shabbat, as well as many other customs.
       These customs were passed down from their grandparents, although
       they may not be understood as Jewish at the time. Some in this
       group grew up practicing all forms of Christianity, some have
       given such practices up completely, others have mixed Christian
       practices with Jewish custom. Such African American Hebrew
       Israelites identify with ancient culture and not the religion of
       Judaism

     * In the United States:
       Note that according to the Council of Jewish Federations, 2.2% of
       America's 5.5 million Jews identify themselves as black. There are
       many observant Black Jews living within American communities in
       all movements--including Orthodoxy. Many African-Americans were
       converted generations ago and their descendants deserve the same
       credibility given to any child born of a Jewish mother-converted
       or otherwise. In the eyes of Judaism, it is whether you are a Jew,
       and not your skin color, that matters.
       In the United States, some groups of Black Jews use the term
       "black hebrews". The name is an artifact of the times when white
       synagogues refused to accept them as Jews.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.8: What about the black jews in South Africa?

Answer:
   
   This group lives in a region in the north of S.A. known as Venda.
   Apparently early Jewish traders in S.A. found that certain Africans in
   Venda practised kashrut and other Jewish practises, and historical
   records of the Boer republics mention black Jews.
   
   There are supposedly 300,000 such Jews in S.A.; they claim to be
   descendants of a group of Yemenite Jews who migrated south and
   intermarried with the locals. Supposedly, there are similar groups all
   along the east coast of Africa. Of particular interest are 40000
   members of the black Lemba people. Like the Abayudaya, these people
   are keen to learn more about Jewish laws and practices. These claims
   of the Lemba are documented at
   http://www.ubalt.edu/kulanu/africa.html.
   
   On the other hand, there is a book about this group (called the
   Lembe') called Voyage to the Invisible City. The author, Tudor Parfitt
   lives with them, studies them and sifts through the early records of
   the area, and concludes (over their objections of course) that their
   "jewish" traits come from Islam, not Judaism. They appear to him to be
   a mixture of locals, Hindus from India (they have lots of ancestor
   worship mixed in too) and Islam (they circumcise at 13 not in the
   first few weeks). He originally concluded that there is little
   likelihood that they have any real Jewish ancestry.
   
   Recently, Kohen Madol Haplotype testing has been performed among the
   Lemba; these tests have proven the Lemba to have the highest
   concentration of the gene marker than any known halakhic Jewish group.
   This is reported in an article titled "Decoding the Priesthood" by
   Peter Hirshberg and Jane Logan, in Jerusalem Report (May 10, 1999
   issue). According to this article, the Lemba have the same proportion
   of the gene as "Western" Jews and a remarkably high frequency among
   their Buba clan, a senior clan parallel to our Cohens.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 13.9: Who Are The Jews of India, And What Are Their
         Origins?

Answer:
   
   India has a legacy of three distinct Jewish groups: the Bene Israel,
   the Cochin Jews, and the White Jews from Europe. Each group practiced
   important elements of Judaism and had active synagogues. The Sephardic
   rites predominate among Indian Jews.
   
   One of the most important Jewish peoples of India are the Bene Israel
   ("Sons of Israel"), whose main population centers were Bombay,
   Calcutta, Old Delhi, and Ahmadabad. The native language of the Bene
   Israel was Marathi, while the Cochin Jews of southern India spoke
   Malayalam.
   
   The Bene Israel claim to be descended from Jews who escaped
   persecution in Galilee in the 2nd century BCE. The Bene Israel
   resemble the non-Jewish Maratha people in appearance and customs,
   which indicates intermarriage between Jews and Indians. However, the
   Bene Israel maintained the practices of Jewish dietary laws,
   circumcision, and observation of Sabbath as a day of rest.
   
   The Bene Israel say their ancestors were oil pressers in the Galil and
   they are descended from survivors of a shipwreck. In the 18th Century
   they were "discovered" by traders from Baghdad. At that time the Bnei
   Israel were practicing just a few outward forms of Judaism (which is
   how they were recognised) but had no scholars of their own. Teachers
   from Baghdad and Cochin taught them mainstream Judaism in the 18th and
   19th centuries.
   
   Jewish merchants from Europe travelled to India in the medieval period
   for purposes of trade, but it is not clear whether they formed
   permanent settlements in south Asia. Our first reliable evidence of
   Jews living in India comes from the early 11th century. It is certain
   that the first Jewish settlements were centered along the western
   coast. Abraham ibn Daud's 12th century reference to Jews of India is
   unfortunately vague, and we do not have further references to Indian
   Jews until several centuries later.
   
   The first Jews in Cochin (southern India) were the so-called "Black
   Jews", who spoke the Malayalam tongue. The "White Jews" settled later,
   coming to India from western European nations such as Holland and
   Spain. A notable settlement of Spanish and Portuguese Jews starting in
   the 15th century was Goa, but this settlement eventually disappeared.
   In the 17th and 18th centuries, Cochin had an influx of Jewish
   settlers from the Middle East, North Africa, and Spain.
   
   The Jews of Cochin say that they came to Cranganore (south-west coast
   of India) after the destruction of the Temple in 70ce. They had, in
   effect, their own principality for many centuries until a chieftanship
   dispute broke out between two brothers in the 15th century. The
   dispute led neighbouring princes to dispossess them. In 1524, the
   Moors, backed by the ruler of Calicut (today called Kozhikode)
   attacked the Jews of Cranganore on the pretext that they were
   "tampering" with the pepper trade. Most Jews fled to Cochin and went
   under the protection of the Hindu Raja there. He granted them a site
   for their own town which later acquired the name "Jew Town" (by which
   it is still known).
   
   Unfortunately for the Jews of Cochin, the Portuguese occupied Cochin
   in this same period and indulged in persecution of the Jews until the
   Dutch displaced them in 1660. The Dutch protestants were tolerant and
   the Jews prospered. In 1795 Cochin passed into the British sphere of
   influence. In the 19th century, Cochin Jews lived in the towns of
   Cochin, Ernakulam, and Parur. Today most of Cochin's Jews have
   emigrated (principally to Israel).
   
   16th and 17th century migrations created important settlements of Jews
   from Persia, Afghanistan, and Khorasan (Central Asia) in northern
   India and Kashmir. By the late 18th century, Bombay became the largest
   Jewish community in India. In Bombay were Bene Israel Jews as well as
   Iraqi and Persian Jews.
   
   Near the end of the 18th century, a third group of Indian Jews
   appears. They are the middle-eastern Jews who came to India through
   trade. They established a trading network stretching from Aleppo to
   Baghdad to Basra to Surat/Bombay to Calcutta to Rangoon to Singapore
   to Hong Kong and eventually as fare as Kobe in Japan. There were
   strong family bonds amongst the traders in all these places.
   
   Typical is the founder of the Calcutta community, Shalom Aharon
   Ovadiah HaCohen. He was born in Aleppo in 1762 and left in 1789. He
   arrived in Surat in 1792 and established himself there. He traded as
   far as Zanzibar. In 1798 he moved to Calcutta. In 1805 he was joined
   by his nephew, Moses Simon Duek HaCohen, who married his eldest
   daughter Lunah. Soon the community was swelled by other traders and
   Baghdadis outnumbered those from Aleppo.
   
   Under British rule, the Jews of India achieved their maximum
   population and wealth, and the Calcutta community continued to grow
   and prosper and trade amongst all the cities of the far east and to
   the rest of the world. The Indians were very tolerant and the Jews of
   Calcutta felt completely at home. Their numbers reached a peak of
   about 5000 during WW-II when they were swelled by refugees fleeing the
   Japanese advance into Burma.
   
   The first generations of Calcutta Jews spoke Judeo-Arabic at home, but
   by the 1890s English was the language of choice. After WWII,
   nationalism fever caught the Indians rather strongly and it became
   less comfortable for the Jews who came to be identified with the
   English by the Indians. India's Jewish population declined
   dramatically starting in the 1940s with heavy immigration to Israel,
   England, and the United States. It is in these 3 nations where the
   most significant settlements of Indian Jews exist today. Today there
   is just a handful of old people and the once vital community with its
   3 synagogues is no more.
   
   For more details, visit the Jews of Chocin Website
   (<http://www.kashrus.org/asian/cochin.html>).
   
   Lastly, note that there were a number of European Jews who lived, or
   settled in India. Some examples: Lady Mountbatten, and Haffkine, after
   whom the famous Haffkine Institute in Bombay (Mumbai) has been named.
   The mother of one of India's most glamorous film actresses, Zeenat
   Aman is said to be Jewish.
   
   Many Indian Jews have reached great prominence. For example, the
   Sassons after whom the Sasson docks, the Sasson hospital, and two of
   Mumbais well known sites- the Jacob Circle, and Flora Fountain have
   been named. In the past years, there has been a Jewish mayor of
   Bombay, and a Jewish Chief of the Navy. In the Indian Army, Jews have
   reached very high posts. A General Jacobs, now the Governor of Goa,
   supervised the surrender of the Pakistani Army in the Liberation of
   Bangladesh in 1971. Maj. Gen. Samson who was awarded the Padma
   Bhushan, and a few other Jews reached prominence in the Indian Army.
   Two of India's leading literary personalities, poet Nissim Ezeickel,
   and cartoonist Abu Abraham are Jewish. Also the late famous Hindi film
   actor David, and the late "Sulochana" the Queen of Indian Silent
   Films, and the actress/dancer Helen. A Dr. Erulkar was the personal
   physician/friend of Mahatma Gandhi. His father, also a Dr. Abraham
   Erulkar, donated land for the synagogue in Ahmedabad, Gujrat. Dr.
   Erulkar's daughter is currently the 1st lady of Cyprus, married to the
   President of Cyprus.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.12 07:58


End of SCJ FAQ Part 7 (Jewish as a Nation) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:05 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Ye-000OVhC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:04 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05102
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:22:00 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 943647A153
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:10 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 822407A12A
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:09 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28086 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:34 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:34 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032534.28085.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 08-Israel
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 35430
Lines: 755

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Jews and Israel (8/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.8>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/08-Israel
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Jews and their relationship to Israel
Message-ID: <faq.8_970682821@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/08-Israel
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.08-Israel
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
                           Part 8: Jews and Israel
                    [Last Post: Wed Oct  4 11:07:06 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

   Section 14. Jews and Israel
                                Section 14:
                              Jews and Israel
                                      
    1. Who is an Israeli? Who may enter Israel under its Law of Return? 
    2. What is Zion? 
    3. What is Zionism? 
    4. Are all Jews Zionists? 
    5. Do Diaspora Jews (Jews outside Israel) support Zionism? 
    6. I've heard there were/are very Orthodox Jews who were/are against
       the state of Israel. How could this be? Who are they?
    7. Did Zionism end with the establishment of Israel? 
    8. Are antisemitism and anti-Zionism the same thing? 
    9. Is Zionism racist? 
   10. What are the roots of Arab opposition to Zionism? 
   11. Can't you criticize Israel without being antisemitic? 
   12. Why is opposition to Israel often seen as being antisemitic? 
   13. Why is Jerusalem so important to Jews? 
   14. I want to move to Israel. Can I become a citizen? 
   15. What is the Wailing Wall and why is it so important? 
   16. Questions on aliyah, military service for olim and more 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.1: Who is an Israeli and who may enter under her Law of
         Return?

Answer:
   
   Israelis are citizens of Israel. Jews may automatically become Israeli
   citizens under the terms of the Law of Return (as long as they have
   not renounced the Jewish faith), as may those associated with Jews,
   such as certain close family members. The Law of Return does not grant
   immediate citizenship to Jews who, sadly, practice other religions. In
   the case of people whose status as Jews is uncertain, Israel will
   still rescue them, especially if they risk being killed as a result of
   Jew-hatred.
   
   There have been efforts to amend the law of Return to exclude from
   automatic citizenship people whose conversions to Judaism would be
   unacceptable by Orthodox halachic standards. While this might only
   affect tens of people, it is an extremely sensitive issue.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.2: What is Zion?

Answer:
   
   Zion is a hill in Jerusalem, and one of the names by which Jews have
   always referred to their homeland, the Land of Israel (Eretz Israel).
   The name 'Zion' is used in Tanakh both for the land of Israel and for
   its national and spiritual capital, Jerusalem.
   
   Zion (Pronounced 'tsee-yohn' in Hebrew) has had a continuous Jewish
   population for thousands of years. For many centuries the majority of
   the Jewish people have lived dispersed in countries all over the
   world. Yet, powerful national-spiritual bonds--expressed mainly in
   liturgy and literature--have constantly linked these Jewish
   communities with their ancestral homeland.
   
   After centuries of decline and neglect under foreign occupation, Zion
   is flourishing once again, with the large increase in its Jewish
   population over the past 100 years, and the restoration of its
   political independence in 1948.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.3: What is Zionism?

Answer:
   
   Zionism is the modern expression of the 1,900 year old dream of
   rebuilding a Jewish state in Israel, after Rome put an end to Jewish
   independence in the Land of Israel. It expresses the conviction that
   the Jewish people have the right to freedom and political independence
   in its homeland.
   
   Political Zionism is the ongoing effort, through political means, to
   develop and secure the Jewish people's national existence in the Land
   of Israel.
   
   Zionism recognizes that Jewish peoplehood is characterized by certain
   common values relating to religion, culture, language, history and
   basic ideals and aspirations, although secular and religious Zionists
   emphasize these aspects differently.
   
   Additional information may be found in the Zionism Reading List,
   available at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/zio-index.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.4: Are all Jews Zionists?

Answer:
   
   Jews are Zionists in the sense that the restoration of the Jewish
   people in its homeland is a fundamental tenet of Judaism. Most Jews
   support the state of Israel--the basic realization of Zionism. Some
   Jews, however, do not accept Zionism as a political movement, but
   believe that independence will only come with the advent of the
   Messiah. There are still other Jews who feel that the question of an
   independent Jewish state is independent of the question of the
   Messiah. Lastly, some Jews do not support Zionism for historical
   reasons.
   
   Zionism developed into an organized political movement, in a period
   marked by growing recognition of national movements in Europe, when
   Jews felt the time was ready for the reassertion of Jewish National
   Identity.
   
   As a movement, it was further spurred by growing antisemitism in
   Europe in the latter part of the 19th century, as groups of Jews
   emigrated to what became Israel. It was formally organized into a
   national movement in 1897, with the call for the restoration of the
   Jewish national home.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.5: Do Diaspora Jews (Jews outside Israel) support
         Zionism?

Answer:
   
   Diaspora Jews, on the whole, support Zionism in one way or another
   through active participation in aspects of the movement itself, or
   through public and/or financial support of Israel.
   
   Some Diaspora Jews realize their belief in Zionism by immigrating to
   the Land of Israel (making 'aliyah' - "going up") to participate
   directly in the task of rebuilding the nation.
   
   Diaspora Jews, whether or not associated with Zionist activities, have
   been enriched culturally, socially and spiritually by the
   reestablishment of Israel in its ancestral homeland. Even non-Zionist
   and anti-Zionist Jews find Israel an excellent place for Torah study.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.6: I've heard there were/are very Orthodox Jews who
         were/are against the state of Israel. How could this be? Who are
         they?

Answer:
   
   It is pointless to single out this situation as something terrible
   about Orthodoxy or even the so-called "ultra-Orthodox". In the early
   1900s, Reform was officially opposed to Zionism, and even today, there
   are numerous secular Jews who are strongly anti-Zionistic. Nowadays,
   most Reform, Conservative, and Reconstructionist Jews support Zionism
   (in fact, Reform has its own Zionist movement, ARZA/World Union). Many
   Orthodox Jews support religious Zionism, and even those Orthodox Jews
   indifferent or opposed to Zionism (particularly secular Zionism) often
   send their sons and daughters to study Torah in Israel.
   
   Anti-Zionist Orthodox Jews believe that Israel can only be regained
   miraculously and view the present state as a blasphemous human attempt
   to usurp G-d's role, and they work to dismantle Israel. However,
   unlike many gentile anti-Zionists, they firmly believe in the Jewish
   right to Israel, but only at that future time of redemption. The
   best-known of the religious anti-Zionists are the Neturei Karta.
   
   There are two common religious grounds given for anti-Zionism. One is
   that today's Zionism is a secular Zionism, packed with non-Jewish
   influences, and lacking key features like Moshiach and the rebuilt
   Temple. Groups based on those groups are more on the non-Zionist, as
   opposed to the anti-Zionist, side. The other grounds are that that
   Talmud (Meseches Kesuvos 111a), as part of a discussion of certain
   Torah verses mentioning oaths, states that when Israel went into the
   second exile, there were three vows between Heaven and Earth:
    1. One that Israel would not "go up like a wall" [conquer Eretz
       Yisrael by massive force]
    2. One that G-d made Israel swear that they would not rebel agains
       the nations of the world [would obey the governments in the exile]
    3. And one that G-d made the non-Jews swear not to oppress Israel
       "too much" [translation of phrase yoter midai]
       
   Groups holding to those grounds are more on the anti-Zionist side.
   
   The religious counter-reply to the above is that secular Zionism is a
   preliminary stage of religious Zionism, and that the vows no longer
   apply since the gentiles violated their part (by such actions as the
   Roman persecutions, the Spanish Inquisition, and the Nazi Holocaust).
   The Balfour declaration of 1917 and the United Nations vote of 1948
   are also regarded as having given permission to the Jews to
   reestablish the state by the non-Jewish rulers of the area. Once this
   permission was granted it could not be revoked. It should also be
   noted that these oaths are only mentioned as a side point in one place
   in a discussion in the Gemoroh and as the viewpoint of an individual.
   Many people feel that they do not apply in any case.
   
   Some Religious Zionist Jews see the formation of the secular state as
   accelerating the process of redemption, with themselves playing a
   major role in doing G-d's will by serving the state, whose creation is
   often seen as miraculous.
   
   So-called "non-Zionist" Jews are pleased that Israel exists from a
   practical standpoint--as a haven for oppressed Jews and as a land
   imbued with holiness well-suited for Torah study. But they don't
   generally assign religious significance to the formation of the modern
   state, and often decry aspects of its secular culture.
   
   [Note: Zionism is used in the strict sense of the Jews should have a
   homeland, preferably Israel (Israel is where "Zion" is, hence
   Zionism). Criticizing today's Israeli government regarding policies X,
   Y, Z is not the same as anti-Zionism.]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.7: Did Zionism end with the establishment of Israel?

Answer:
   
   The reestablishment of the State of Israel meant the realization of
   the major element of Zionist ideology: the restoration of Jewish
   sovereignty in the Land of Israel.
   
   The Zionist ideal, however, contains facets that are still in the
   process of being realized. The Zionist ideal aspires to:

     * An Israel at peace with all its neighbors

     * An Israel enjoying full political and economic independence

     * The social and economic well-being of all citizens and communities
       residing in Israel.
       
   For the religious zionists, there is also the wish for a modern,
   halachic, Jewish state.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.8: Are antisemitism and anti-Zionism the same thing?

Answer:
   
   There is a dangerous confluence between anti-Zionism and antisemitism,
   even though the two concepts are not always identical. Anti-Zionism is
   directed against the political realization of Zionism--the State of
   Israel.
   
   Anti-Zionism has also become a catchword for antisemitism and has
   provided antisemites with a convenient cloak behind which to conceal
   their hatred of Jews.
   
   It is probably worth remembering the words of Dr. Martin Luther King:
   
     "... You declare, my friend, that you do not hate the Jews, you are
     merely 'anti-Zionist.' And I say, let the truth ring forth from the
     high mountain tops, let it echo through the valleys of G-d's green
     earth: When people criticize Zionism, they mean Jews--this is G-d's
     own truth.
     
     "Antisemitism, the hatred of the Jewish people, has been and
     remains a blot on the soul of mankind. In this we are in full
     agreement. So know also this: anti-Zionism is inherently
     antisemitic, and ever will be so."
     
     (From M.L. King Jr., "Letter to an Anti-Zionist Friend," Saturday
     Review XLVII (Aug. 1967), p. 76. Reprinted in M.L. King Jr., This I
     Believe: Selections from the Writings of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
     (New York, 1971), pp. 234-235.) 

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.9: Is Zionism racist?

Answer:
   
   No. Zionism is a process with the ultimate goal of a Jewish homeland.
   Participation in this process is not restricted to Jews alone.
   Furthermore, the question is an example of how even simple questions
   can use inflammatory terminology, as "racist" has a pejoritive sense
   and is an imprecise term.
   
   A central tenet of Zionism is that there should exist a place in the
   world where Jews have sovereignty. This is no different from the
   ethnic desires of other minority and ethnic groups; I'm sure you can
   name numerous examples. Recent history has demonstrated the need for
   such a homeland; alas, humanity doesn't appear to be moving in a
   direction that would eliminate that need.
   
   Is the desire for a Jewish homeland "racist"? No. Racism is a belief
   that race is the primary determinant of human traits and that racial
   differences produce an inherent superiority of a particular race.
   Judaism is not a race--adherents come from multiple ethnic
   backgrounds. More importantly, there is no notion in Zionism that Jews
   are superior to other races (unlike, for example, the Nazis, who held
   that the Aryan race was superior).
   
   Please remember that Zionism is distinct from the state of Israel; if
   you look at the history of Zionism, you will see that for some of the
   zionistic movements, Israel was not the target homeland (in fact,
   you'll discover that at one time, Uganda was an option). Israel is
   modern political state that strives to provide a pluralistic and open
   society, comprising many ethnic and religious groups. It doesn't
   always succeed in this goal, but neither do other democratic states.
   As a modern state, Israel is subject to various political realities
   that dictate its laws and regulations. Discussion of these laws and
   regulations is less germane to the focus of S.C.J and is more
   appropriate for talk.politics.mideast. However, the primacy of Jewish
   law in Israel is no more "racist" than the primacy of Catholic law in
   Vatican City, the primacy of the Church of England in Great Britain,
   or the primacy of Islam in many Arabic countries.
   
   So what is the connection between Zionism and Israel? Zionism helped
   found the state, and provided the underlying zeal for many of Israel's
   leaders. The Zionist zeal still helps provide funding for the state,
   as many Jews outside of Israel support Zionist organizations operating
   in Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.10: What are the roots of Arab opposition to Zionism?

Answer:
   
   National rights: 
          Most Arab nations demand Arab sovereignty over the entire
          Middle East, to the total exclusion of Jewish rights.
          
   Religion: 
          Historically, Islam has not recognized the right to sovereignty
          of any non-Muslim people in any part of the "Islamic world."
          Jew, like Christians, have been relegated to the position of
          dhimmis--protected subjects--peoples under Muslim domination.
          Islam, therefore, rejects the concept of a Jewish state in what
          it regards as the Islamic-Arab world.
          
          For information on Islam and its beliefs, interested readers
          are referred to the soc.religion.islam FAQ, available as:
          
  ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/islam-faq

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.11: Can't you criticize Israel without being
         antisemitic?

Answer:
   
   Criticism that habitually singles out Israel for criticism while
   ignoring far worse actions by other countries (especially other Middle
   Eastern countries) is generally perceived as anti-Jewish. Likening
   Israel to Nazi Germany, or to traditional anti-Jewish stereotypical
   behavior is another sure sign of Jew-baiting.
   
   It's also better to criticize within the Jewish community, rather than
   airing dirty laundry that can be twisted and used against us. Jewish
   newspapers are regularly filled with lively debate on Israel.
   
   See the superb essay "Judging Israel" by Charles Krauthammer, Time
   magazine, February 26, 1990.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.12: Why is opposition to Israel often seen as being
         antisemitic?

Answer:
   
   The vast majority of the Jews in Israel wound up there as refugees
   with no other options.
   
   Many Jews went there to flee the Holocaust, at a time when countries
   like America and Great Britain had shut their doors to Jews.
   
   And many of the Holocaust survivors wound up as displaced persons
   after World War II. While America was supporting the former Nazis with
   the Marshall plan, the survivors were largely ignored. Many of them
   found a welcome in Israel.
   
   And then, after Israel was founded, most of the Arab nations pushed
   out their Jewish populations. They had no place to go but Israel. The
   best example of this, of course, is what happened to the Jews in the
   "West Bank." The Arab armies pushed out all of the Jews in the
   territories they conquered in the 1947-48 war. In particular, they
   destroyed Jewish communities that had been inhabited continuously for
   thousands of years. East Jerusalem, where many now wish to deny Jewish
   settlement rights, had a Jewish majority before 1947.
   
   And recently, many Jews have gone to Israel to escape persecution in
   Russia and Ethiopia. Again, there were no other options.
   
   So opposition to Israel, or an insensitivity to its security needs,
   does carry with it an indifference to the fate of these Jews who have
   had no other refuge from death or serious persecution. Such
   indifference is, indeed, a form of antisemitism: if the Arabs succeed
   in driving the Jews into the sea, they will be merely continuing what
   Hitler started.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.13: Why is Jerusalem so important to Jews?

Answer:
   
   According to tradition, the Jews are commanded to worship at the
   Temple (Beis Hamikdash) at the place G-d specifies. When this central
   site is extant, sacrifices may be brought only there. Also, Jews are
   commanded to go to the central site for the three "pilgrimage
   festivals", it is the only place where the Pesach sacrifice may be
   eaten, and it is the only place where the "second tithe" may be eaten.
   After David united the tribes into a kingdom, he conquered the city of
   Jerusalem and made it his capital. He then wanted to build the temple
   rather than leaving the ark in the temporary quarters it had been in
   until that time. G-d informed him that while he was not allowed to
   build the temple, his son, Solomon, would, and that temple would
   remain the central site for the Jewish people.
   
   After the temple was destroyed the Jews were not allowed to go back to
   bringing sacrifices at local altars (called bamos or high places).
   Thus, the second temple had to be built on the site of the first. When
   the second temple was destroyed, the restriction still held. Thus,
   according to tradition, it is the only place where the temple can be
   rebuilt when the Moshiach comes.
   
   In the time of Avrohom, the city was the center of the remnants of
   monotheism from the days of Noah. It was the site of the Yeshivah of
   Shem and Ever (Noah's son & grandson) where they taught about G-d and
   the laws G-d had given to Noah.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.14: I want to move to Israel. Can I become a citizen?

Answer:
   
   Jews are granted automatic citizenship. Gentiles may also become
   citizens, but after a standard naturalization process. You can get
   more information from the Jewish Agency for Israel, at
   http:///www.jafi.org.il/

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.15: What is the Wailing Wall and why is it so important?

Answer:
   
   The term "wailing wall" is not used by Jews, who instead prefer the
   term "kotel/kosel hamaaravi," Western Wall.
   
   This wall is the only remaining structure from the second temple left
   standing after the Roman destruction. Since the Jews are considered to
   be in a state of "ritual impurity" until certain special sacrifices
   can be brought (notably the ashes of the red heifer), religious Jews
   are forbidden to set foot on the actual site of the temple and this is
   the closest they can come to praying at the temple site. [Note:
   According to Rav Shlomo Goren, Jews can go on the southest 120 meters
   of the temple mount. This is the result of intersecting all the ideas
   of all the POSKIM.]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 14.16: Questions on aliyah, military service for olim and
         more

Answer:
   
   First, a good place to start is Jacob Richman's Aliyah pages at
   http://www.cji.co.il/aliyah/. This page will provide links to mailing
   lists for people with questions, as well as information on aliyah
   centers, appliances, housing, jobs, learning Hebrew, olim,
   organizations, useful addresses, web links, and more. You might also
   check the Aliyah forum at Virtual Jerusalem,
   http://www.virtualjerusalem.com/.
   
   Second, the most important thing to know about rights for Olim, army
   service etc. is that the rules keep changing!. Therefore, if you are
   considering Aliya or coming as a tourist and possibly later changing
   your status, go and speak to the local Aliya shaliah and bother them
   about making sure that the answers they are giving you are up to date!
   
   Currently, length of army service is calculated based on variables
   such as age when you become an oleh (temporary resident or citizen),
   age when you become a citizen (after 3 years or more as temp.
   resident), marital status, number of children, and physical profile.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.12 07:58


End of SCJ FAQ Part 8 (Jews and Israel) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:10 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yj-000OVyC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:09 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05141
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:44 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id D62397A15C
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:15 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 42AC87A122
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:09 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28083 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:33 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:33 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032533.28082.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 09-Antisemitism
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 75947
Lines: 1528

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Holocaust, Antisemitism, Missionaries (9/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.9>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/09-Antisemitism
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: The Holocaust and Antisemitism, Jewish Missionaries
Message-ID: <faq.9_970769221@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/09-Antisemitism
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.09-Antisemitism
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
            Part 9: The Holocaust, Antisemitism, and Missionaries
                    [Last Post: Thu Oct  5 11:07:07 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

                                Section 15:
                       Churban Europa (The Holocaust)
                                      
    1. Why do Jews seem to treat the Holocaust as their tragedy alone? 
    2. Where can I get information on the Holocaust? 
    3. How do I get tickets to see the United States Holocaust Memorial
       Museum? 
    4. Is there any online information available on Yad Vashem? 

                                Section 16:
                     Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews
                                      
    1. Why is antisemitism used to mean anti-Jewish? 
    2. Is there any truth to the myth of the Jewish American Princess? 
    3. What is the connection between Judaism and Freemasonry? 
    4. How do I counter antisemitic postings such as the infamous
       "Protocols"? 

                                Section 17:
                          Countering Missionaries
                                      
    1. Are groups calling themselves "Jews for Jesus" or "Messianic
       Jews[sic]" Jewish movements? 
    2. Is belief in Jesus-as-God compatible with any Jewish movements? 
    3. What do missionary groups believe? 
    4. What sort of deceptive terminology do missionaries use? 
    5. How can these missionaries be countered? 
    6. Who is financing "Jews for Jesus" and similar groups? 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 15.1: Why do Jews seem to treat the Holocaust as their
         tragedy alone?

Answer:
   
   Jews don't, and in fact, a hefty percentage of articles on the
   Holocaust go out of their way to mention the number of gentiles
   murdered, as well as soldiers and civilians killed in the war itself.
   
   Jews focus upon it for several reasons: (1) It destroyed a third (1/3)
   of world Jewry, almost all of European Jewry, and obliterated the
   entire European Jewish culture. (2) It was directed primarily at
   Jews--Hitler himself wrote that his real war was against Judaism and
   the idea of absolute morality, the antithesis of amoral nationalism.
   (see his discussions with his friend, Hermann Rauschning) (3) It
   happened just 50 years ago, which is recent.
   
   It is important to mention other attempts at mass extermination or
   national destruction, such as Armenian, Cambodian, East Timorese,
   Kurdish, Native Americans, Stalin's purges, etc.
   
   One should also mention other large scale injustices such as Black
   African enslavement in America, but to make clear that even if it is
   not the same as the Holocaust, it's still a moral problem.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 15.2: Where can I get information on the Holocaust?

Answer:
   
   Additional information may be found in the Antisemitism Reading List,
   found at http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/ant-index.html/.
   
   Information is also available on the newsgroup
   soc.culture.jewish.holocaust, which is a storagehouse for all kinds of
   information from various sources on the Holocaust in Europe that
   occurred between 1942-1945 (along with the events leading up to it
   that happened in the early 30's). In that group you will find
   Holocaust materials from both personal testimonies of survivors and
   their families and "hard" facts from historians and observers. The
   newsgroup has a archive at http://www.holocausthistory.org/.
   
   The Nizkor Project (An Electronic Holocaust Educational Resource)
   [Home Page: <http://www.nizkor.org>] has also made the following
   information on the Holocaust available; it can be used to answer the
   "revisionists":

     * A two-part FAQ on Auschwitz. The URL for part 1 is:
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?camps/auschwitz/auschwitz.faq1>.
       The URL for part 2 is:
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?camps/auschwitz/auschwitz.faq2>.

     * A two-part FAQ on Operation Reinhard -- A Layman's Guide to
       Belzec, Sobibor, and Treblinka. The URL for part 1 is
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?camps/aktion.reinhard/reinhard.faq1
       >. The URL for part 2 is
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?camps/aktion.reinhard/reinhard.faq2
       >.

     * A two-part FAQ on the Institute for Historical Review. The URL for
       part 1 is
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?orgs/american/ihr/ihr.faq1>. The
       URL for part 2 is
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org?orgs/american/ihr/ihr.faq2>.

     * A two-part FAQ that provides common answers to the various
       revisionists claims that the Holocaust never occured. The URL for
       part 1 is
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?people/l/leuchter.fred/leuchter.faq
       1>. The URL for part 2 is
       <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?people/l/leuchter.fred/leuchter.faq
       2>.
       
   If you are using WWW or Mosaic, the relevant pointer is:
   
   http://www.nizkor.org/faqs
   
   The Nizkor Project also offers a direct and well-documented response
   to the IHR's "66 Questions & Answers About the Holocaust," at
   <http://www.nizkor.org/features/qar.>.
   
   The Nizkor Project's archives are now searchable, using URL
   <http://search.nizkor.org/search.html>.
   
   Alas, Nazi-ism didn't end with the Holocaust, and there has been a
   resurgance of neo-Nazi groups in Germany. Between October 1992 and
   April 1993, the Simon Wiesenthal Center (http://www.wiesenthal.com/)
   conducted a covert operation to determine the strength, financial
   base, and ultimate leadership of Germany's neo-Nazi movement. Center
   officials also wanted to find out the links between Germany's radical
   right and similar organizations in the United States, and to determine
   the degree of commitment on the part of German police towards the
   enforcement of laws passed by the German parliament over the years to
   thwart the resurgence of Nazism in the Bundesrepublik. The results of
   this operation are documented and available on the net at the URL
   <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?orgs/american/wiesenthal.center/swc.opr
   ep>.
   
   A Holocaust bibliography is also available at the URL
   <http://ftp.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi?bibliographies>. It contains thousands
   of listings for those interested in research.
   
   You might also contact the Simon Wisenthal Center:
   
    9760 West Pico Blvd.
    Los Angeles, CA 90035
    voice: (310)-553-9036
    fax: (310)-277-5558
    e-mail: webmaster@wiesenthal.com
    WWW: <http://www.wiesenthal.com>
    Reference librarian/archivist: Paul Hamburg

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 15.3: How do I get tickets to see the United States
         Holocaust Memorial Museum?

Answer:
   
   Opened in April 1993, on the fiftieth anniversary of the Warsaw ghetto
   uprising, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington,
   D.C., summons all who enter its portals to rise to an important and
   extraordinary challenge: to remember and immortalize the 6 milion Jews
   and millions of other Nazi victims of World War II--Gypsies, Poles,
   homosexuals, the handicapped, Jehovah's Witnesses, political and
   religious dissidents, Soviet prisoners of war--who were murdered in
   the most horrifying event of our time: the Holocaust.
   
   The main task of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum is to
   present the facts of the Holocaust, to tell the American public as
   clearly and comprehensively as possible what happened in that darkest
   chapter of human history. To this end, the Museum has reconstructed
   the history of the Holocaust through multiple media: the meaningful
   arrangement of objects as well as the presentation of documentary
   photographic and cinematographic materials. This museum holds the
   world's largest and most diversified collection of Holocaust-related
   objects; but in its display it is a "conceptual museum" rather than a
   traditional, object-oriented one: it's primary purpose is to
   communicate concepts, complex information, and knowledge, rather than
   merely to display objects of the Holocaust, unrelated to the
   historical context of each individual exhibit.
   
   A visit to the museum, or a tour through the virtual exhibition, can
   be an interesting and challenging learning experience but, at the same
   time, it also will be a thought-provoking, disturbing, and personally
   upsetting one. And so it should be.
   
   The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum is a free, Federal Museum
   dedicated to presenting the history of the persecution and murder of
   six million Jews and millions of other victims of Nazi tyrrany from
   1933-1945. To accomodate large numbers of visitors expected by the
   museum, and to ensure a meaningful experience for every one, the
   museum is open on a time-ticket basis, which means that a ticket is
   required for admission, and that tickets are marked with a specific
   time and day in order to regulate the number of people passing through
   the exhibits at any given time.
   
   Tickets may be obtained in one of three ways: you can visit or call
   Ticketmaster at 1-800-432-SEAT and purchase tickets for a specified
   date and time using a credit card. Currently, there is a $3.50 phone
   charge and a $1.00 per ticket handling fee. Tickets to the museum are
   free, except for the handling charges which go directly to
   Ticketmaster. A second method of obtaining tickets is to go directly
   to the walk-up window and request them. Demand is heavy, and only a
   portion of each day's tickets are set aside for walk-up business. The
   last, and most difficult, method of obtaining tickets is to call your
   elected representative and request assistance in finding tickets. The
   Museum is not part of the Smithsonian system, and therefore some
   Congressmen do not bother to request complimentary tickets from the
   museum. Some do.
   
   The Museum is open from 10:00-5:30 daily, except for Christmas (go
   figure!) and certain Jewish holidays (to be determined). The telephone
   number is (202) 488-0400. Their home page is available at
   http://www.ushmm.org/
   .

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 15.4: Is there any online information available on Yad
         Vashem?

Answer:
   
   Yad Vashem is the Holocaust memorial of the Jewish people. Located in
   Jerusalem Israel, it was established in 1953 by an act of Parliament.
   
   At the core of the Holocaust was the decision to kill the Jews--six
   million of whom were murdered. These events are of monumental
   significance for the contemporary world and, by directing visitors to
   confront this history, we hope to stimulate them to grapple with
   issues that strike at our basic nature as human beings and to gain
   insights about our societies and about ourselves.
   
   The name YAD VASHEM comes from a passage in the Book of Isaiah:
   
     "And to them will I give in my house and within my walls a memorial
     ... an everlasting name [a "yad vashem"], that shall not be cut
     off." (chapter 56, verse 5).
     
   Yad Vashem is available via WWW using the following URL:
   http://www.yad-vashem.org.il/

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 16.1: Why is antisemitism used to mean anti-Jewish? Aren't
         Arabs Semites too?

Answer:
   
   The word "anti-Semitism" was coined in Germany in 1879 by Wilhelm Marr
   as a more euphonious way of saying "Judenhass" (Jew-hatred), and has
   always meant exactly that. Its antonym, "Semitism" connoted a positive
   attitude toward the Jewish people. The word has become too sanitized
   and too easily misunderstood, which is exactly what Marr tried to
   accomplish with the word's creation.
   
   According to a (now discredited) nineteenth century theory that held
   that racial groups and linguistic groups coincide, Semites are natives
   of a group of Middle Eastern nations that are closely related in
   ethnicity, culture and language. Under this theory, the modern day
   Semites would be the Jews and Arabs. In ancient times, the Assyrians,
   Canaanites, Carthaginians, Aramaeans and Akkadians (one of the
   ancestors of the ancient Babylonians) were also counted among the
   Semitic nations. It should be noted that many of these groups
   contributed much to the development of modern culture, in particular
   the Phoenicians (Semitic seafarers including Canaanites, Aramaeans and
   northern Israelites), the Babylonians, as well as the Arabs and Jews.
   
   One theory that has been voiced among the practitioners of ancient
   history is that these groups emerged from a common home in Arabia
   during the early Sumerian period. More likely, they were descended
   from various waves of people who entered the Middle East, only the
   last of which brought the Semitic languages. Like the Babylonian king
   Hammurabi, Abraham appears to have been an "Amurru" or West Semite, a
   group that spread out from the Levant to as far east as Ur and
   Babylon. Hebrew and Aramaic are both West Semitic languages.
   
   The modern day "Semites" all claim to trace their ancestry to Noah's
   son, Shem, from whom they take their name.
   
   Given that the theory of "semites" and non-"semites" is now
   discredited, the preferred term to use is "Antisemitism", which has a
   general connotation of "anti-Jewish". When written in this fashion, it
   helps to eliminate the confusion with the discredited theory. (The use
   of the non-hyphenated form is a suggestion of the distinguished
   historian James Parkes). Emil Fackenheim, the Jewish philosopher, has
   also adopted this spelling, explaining "... the spelling ought to be
   antisemitism without the hyphen, dispelling the notion that there is
   an entity 'Semitism' which 'anti-Semitism' opposes" (Emil Fackenheim,
   "Post-Holocaust Anti-Jewishness, Jewish Identity and the Centrality of
   Israel," in World Jewry and the State of Israel, ed. Moshe Davis, p.
   11, n. 2).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 16.2: Is there any truth to the myth of the Jewish American
         Princess?

Answer:
   
   While there may be a few token women who fit the stereotype, it's a
   cruel slur frequently directed at Jewish women in general, and not
   always by Jews. (see William Styron's Sophie's Choice, especially
   chapter 7, for some very offensive Jewish portrayals, including the
   JAP.)
   
   The most common use of the slur "JAP" is by Jewish men who rationalize
   their habit of dating gentile women by slandering the Jewish women
   whom they could be dating. Many who use the term are unaware of its
   offensive nature, so if someone uses it innocently, politely ask them
   not to use the term.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 16.3: What is the connection between Judaism and
         Freemasonry?

Answer:
   
   The following is extracted from a paper by Paul M. Bessel of Arlington
   VA that accompanied presentations in February 1989. The FAQ would
   would like to thank David Kaufman (dkaufman@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu) for
   providing this information; the full text of the presentation may be
   obtained from him.
   
   Jews were actively involved in the beginnings of Freemasonry in
   America. There is evidence they were among those who established
   Masonry in seven of the original thirteen states: Rhode Island, New
   York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Georgia, South Carolina, and Virginia.
   
   A Jewish Mason, Moses Michael Hays, helped introduce the Masonic
   Scottish Rite in America. Paul Revere served under him as Deputy Grand
   Master. There were several other Jews who held the masonic titles in
   the late 1700's: Solomon Bush in Pennsylvania, Joseph Myers in
   Maryland and later in South Carolina, and Abraham Forst of
   Philadelphia in Virginia in 1781. Another Jewish Grand Master was
   Moses Seixas in Rhode Island from 1791 until 1800. There were many
   other American Jewish Masons in early American history, including one
   in George Washington's original Fredericksburg Lodge.
   
   Jewish Masons played an important part in the American Revolution,
   with 24 of them serving as officers in George Washington's army. In
   addition, several helped finance the American cause, including Haym
   Salomon, a Philadelphia Jewish Mason who with others contributed and
   raised money for the American war effort and loaned money to
   Jefferson, Madison, Lee, and others for their personal expenses.
   Salomon was imprisoned by the British and died in his 40's bankrupt
   and with penniless heirs.
   
   There is evidence that Jews, including rabbis, continued to be
   involved in the Masonic movement in the United States. There have been
   at least 51 Jewish American Grand Masters. Today there are many Jews
   active in Masonry in America and other countries. Israel has about 60
   Masonic lodges with 3,000 members.
   
   Jews had also been involved to a small extent in the formation of
   modern Freemasonry in the early 1700's in England. Until then Jews
   were not permitted to participate in many of the ordinary activities
   of life. Then the Enlightenment concept of the universality of all
   people brought about a society where people's religious beliefs did
   not affect their rights as citizens. Jews were gradually permitted to
   exercise the rights of citizenship and to pursue their lives as they
   wished.
   
   Many Jews viewed joining Freemasonry as part of their "emancipation"
   from the old legal and social exclusions. Modern Masonry was as much a
   product of the Enlightenment as the emancipation of Jews. Many society
   leaders were Freemasons and if Jews could join this fraternity that
   would prove they were being accepted. They could also use the
   opportunities presented by their participation in a social
   organization with Christians to prove the two could prosper by their
   association. Freemasonry's philosophy of the brotherhood of all people
   indicated Masonry would accept Jews as members.
   
   There are many common themes and ideals in Masonic and Jewish rituals,
   symbols, and words:

     * Belief in God, prayer, immortality of the soul, charity, and
       acting respectfully to all people are essential elements of
       Freemasonry as well as Judaism, and of course other religions too.

     * Masonry and Judaism, as well as other religions and statements of
       ethical standards, teach that we must discipline ourselves and
       keep our passions in check. Jewish masons follow rituals in
       synagogues and in Masonic lodges to help them develop this
       ability.

     * Judaism and Masonry give the greatest respect and support for
       freedom of individuals. Judaism teaches that everyone is capable
       of good or evil and attempts to help us use our free will to
       choose the righteous path. Masonry teaches that those who are
       morally fit can find "light" in Masonry if they desire it of their
       own free will. The concept of exercising free will to accept the
       law and atone for past transgressions is what Rosh Hashanah and
       Yom Kippur are about.

     * Light is an important symbol in both Freemasonry and Judaism.
       Contrast the holiday of Chanukah with the use of light in Masonry,
       where it represents the Divine spirit, religious freedom, and
       rededication of the Temple in Jerusalem and of the spiritual
       Temple within us all.

     * One of the fundamental symbols of Masonry is the Temple of Solomon
       and the Second Temple, which also figured as the central part of
       the Jewish religion. King Solomon, one of the greatest figures in
       Jewish history, is also one of the most important figures in
       Masonic rituals.
       
   While there are many common aspects of Judaism and Freemasonry, it
   also should be recognized that because of the history of attempts to
   force Jews to convert they can be uncomfortable about being asked to
   say Christian prayers or otherwise indicate non-Jewish beliefs. Some
   parts of Masonry use New Testament prayers, references to Saints, the
   cross as a religious symbol (although it is stated that the cross is
   being used as a symbol of religion in general rather than the
   Christian religion), and one Masonic organization requires aspiring
   members to swear to support the Christian faith. Jews must deal with
   these references to other religions by remaining quiet or not
   participating in those parts of Masonry.
   
   Did Masonry always welcome Jews? No. Although a Jew, Edward Rose,
   became a Mason in a London lodge in 1732, this event apparently
   excited attention and led to other lodges debating whether they should
   permit Jewish members. Eventually, significant numbers of Jews joined
   English Masonry where they were apparently welcomed. French Masonic
   lodges, and those in different countries affiliated with the French
   Grand Orient during the Napoleonic occupations, admitted Jews without
   restrictions. In 1869 a Jew was Grand Master of the Scottish Rite in
   Paris. However, later in the 1800's French society became more
   anti-Semitic, culminating in the Dreyfus affair where a French army
   officer was unjustly accused of treason mainly because he was a Jew,
   and French Masonry unfortunately also became more anti-Jewish. Today,
   some parts of French Masonry are officially neutral about religion and
   do not even require a belief in God. In Scandinavia, according to some
   sources, Masonry is officially Christian and does not accept Jewish
   members.
   
   It is probably not surprising that the country with the longest
   history of anti-Semitic prejudice in Freemasonry as well as in society
   is Germany. Most lodges there did not permit Jews to be members, and
   they even questioned visiting Masonic brethren about their religion at
   the doors of their lodges and barred Jews even if they were Masons in
   good standing in other lodges. This caused lodges in England, the
   Netherlands, and the United States to protest but they did not
   retaliate against visiting German Masons.
   
   German officials feared secret societies as potential sources of
   subversion, so the Prussian government became involved in Masonry as a
   means to watch and control it. The future Kaiser Wilhelm I was the
   patron of the three Berlin Grand Lodges for many years, and he decided
   that Jews would only be permitted if there was unanimous agreement.
   Since one of the Grand Lodges was known to be adamant against
   accepting Jews, this forced the others who wanted to be more tolerant
   to maintain anti-Jewish policies.
   
   In Russia, Freemasonry was also suppressed because of the belief it
   might be used to support political activity against the Csarist
   regime, at the same time that Jews were prevented from obtaining
   rights of citizenship in that country.
   
   Various claims were made by those who wanted to keep Jews out of
   Masonry. Some said Masonry was a Christian institution and Jews could
   not become members unless they converted. Some said only Christians
   could possess the good character necessary to achieve Masonic ideals.
   
   Others said Masonry has Christian symbols and prayers but Jews could
   become Masons if they simply complied with requirements such as
   swearing on the Christian Gospels and eating pork at Masonic meals
   (both violations of halacha), without having to convert. However,
   there was also an argument that if a Jew voluntarily complied with
   Christian practices he showed he was contemptuous of his own religion
   and had a bad character, and was thus unworthy to be a Mason.
   
   Another argument was that Jews preferred to be in their own social
   groups. It was said they should not try to push their way into Masonic
   lodges where they were not wanted, would be uncomfortable, and would
   make others uncomfortable by their presence. Some Jews did join lodges
   that were primarily Jewish and the B'nai B'rith organization in its
   early days had a ritual parallel to Freemasonry.
   
   Finally, there were the rawest antisemitic arguments. Some of those
   who wanted to keep Jews out of Masonry said the Jewish religion was
   inherently evil, or that Jews were racially and genetically evil and
   could never be permitted in Masonry even if they converted.
   
   In general, Freemasonry's attitudes toward Jews mirrors those of the
   rest of society. Jews became more acceptable from the late 1700's
   until the 1870's. From that time on, anti-Semitism increased in many
   countries. This also occurred in Freemasonry, but by then Judaism and
   Masonry were being jointly attacked.
   
   Freemasons and Jews always had critics. Eventually the bigots realized
   they could promote their ideas by tying Masons and Jews together as
   objects of hatred.
   
   Critics said Freemasonry and Judaism were dedicated to undermining the
   institutions of existing society, including Christianity and the
   State, and pointed to the secrecy associated with both as proof of
   their evil intentions. Masons and Jews were said to be involved in, or
   benefited from, radical efforts such as the American, French, and
   Russian revolutions. Masonry and Judaism promoted free will of men,
   contrary to efforts of those who sought to insure that people had the
   "correct" thoughts. (This may explain why the Roman Catholic Papacy
   has expressed its antagonism toward Freemasonry so frequently and
   strongly since 1738, and why extreme conservatives in other religions
   also oppose Freemasonry.) Gradually the charge was made that
   Freemasons and Jews were both evil and they were purposely supporting
   each others' radical schemes.
   
   Ironically, Masons and Jews were also sometimes accused of being too
   reactionary. Aristocrats often belonged to Masonic lodges, and some
   German Masons promoted the return of the Kaiser after World War I
   brought about a republic. Also, some Jews still dressed and acted in
   the same conservative ways as their ancestors in the middle ages and
   thus kept themselves apart from modern society.
   
   Increasingly Jews and Freemasons were accused of being disloyal to
   their countries, keeping strange secrets, and designing to take over
   the world.
   
   The ultimate form of this hatred was the sinister "Protocols of the
   Elders of Zion", which originated in Russia and received wide
   circulation after it was translated into German in the 1920's. Some
   bigots claimed this document was a transcript of a meeting of Jewish
   leaders plotting world domination, in partnership with Freemasons.
   Although this document was not even a clever hoax, its influence was
   unbelievably widespread and long-lasting in whipping up hatred against
   Jews and Masons by many, including Henry Ford in the United States
   during his long anti-Jewish campaign in the 1920's and 1930's.
   
   It was a short step from this to the ideology of the Nazis. Hitler
   attacked Masons as well as Jews, and after taking control of Germany
   and other European countries Nazis used the slogan "All Masons
   Jews--all Jews Masons", and persecuted Masons, Jews, and others. The
   Soviet Union and other totalitarian regimes have consistently attacked
   Freemasonry, because they cannot tolerate an organization whose basic
   beliefs are freedom of individuals and tolerance and generosity toward
   all people.
   
   Dictatorships have regularly attacked and persecuted Masons and Jews,
   and these attacks on Masons and Jews together are not all in the past.
   Last year a group called the "Islamic Resistance Movement--Palestine"
   said that Freemasonry and other "Zionist-affiliated" organizations are
   about to be liquidated.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 16.4: How do I counter antisemitic postings such as the
         infamous "Protocols"?

Answer:
   
   A good starting point is the web page
   <http://www.igc.apc.org/ddickerson/protocols.html>. This site contains
   a number of links with information on how to counter the protocols.
   
   Another page that might be of use is
   http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Cyprus/8815/. This Web site provides
   refutations to various alleged quotes from the Talmud which are
   distributed by anti-Semites as well as refutations of other
   anti-Semitic claims.
   
   In a related issue, there is an urban legend circulating about Barnes
   and Noble stocking the Protocols as a Jewish book. Here is a
   refutation of that legend, from the fellow who started the protest,
   Rabbi Eric Silver:
   
                                                              March 1999
     
     This will be (I hope) my final statement on the Barnes and Noble
     issue, and because of its content, I would ask that it be given the
     widest possible distribution. (I probably don't need to say that.
     My e-mail box, my fax lines and my telephone have been jammed for
     days.
     
     As many of you know, some weeks ago I contacted Barnes and Noble
     over the fact that they were carrying "The Protocols of the Learned
     Elders of Zion" under the rubric of "Judaica" (yes and no-depending
     upon how and where one looked on the net and in the retail stores,)
     and that their web site contained a review by a person purporting
     to be a university professor, attesting to the historicity of the
     book and claiming that many of the dire predictions and plots in
     the book were already coming to fruition. Barnes and Noble told me
     that they saw it as their mission to carry every title in print,
     cited the First Amendment, and you can guess the rest, so I wrote
     an e-mail describing the situation, sending it out to the various
     lists on which I am a subscriber. Friday afternoon I received a
     phone call from Gus Carlson who heads up the Communications and
     Customer Relations Department at Barnes and Noble, and Laura Dawson
     who manages the company's data base for the on-line and retail
     stores. They had just gotten off the phone after a session with
     ADL. That call was followed by a phone call from Tom Simon, Vice
     President of Content Development at the company. They deeply
     regretted the earlier response I had received, and both wanted to
     assure me that at no time did any anti-Semitic intent color Barnes
     and Noble's actions in this matter. I think they are to be
     absolutely believed on this score. This company carries many books,
     and each book has its adherents and its detractors. The company's
     initial response to me was to cite First Amendment freedoms, and
     indicate that they would carry even controversial books. I would be
     the first to agree with that position. "Protocols," however, is in
     a different category altogether, and the three B&N executives with
     whom I spoke all agree with that. They made plain to me that the
     company was not aware of the book's true nature at the outset of
     all this brouhaha, and that had they been, the book would have been
     classified differently. They also assured me that new company
     policy would ensure that reviews would be carefully screened to
     ensure that a spurious review does not pop up on their web site.
     
     A bit of clarification is in order: very often a book will be
     classified by its distributor, and Barnes and Noble will accept the
     classification. An out of print version of "Protocols" that carries
     the label "Judaica" will be classified that way on the Internet
     site because no one at B&N knows any different. That's a far cry
     from malice. Similarly, if it finds its way onto a shelf in a
     retail store, there are obvious reasons why the manager would place
     it in the Judaica area. The title itself is misleading, and pity
     the poor store manager who obviously doesn't have the time to read
     every single book in the store.
     
     I think we're done with this issue, and in the best possible way.
     Please-don't boycott Barnes and Noble. They don't deserve it. They
     are honest book merchants who go out of their way to provide the
     reading public with the best in books and service. At no time in
     any of this was there even a scintilla of malicious intent.
     Occasionally even a good company will slip up, but once B&N became
     aware of the book's true nature, they acted with alacrity. The fake
     review was pulled, and the book is being appropriately identified.
     They have taken steps to ensure that spurious reviews don't pop up
     on any book that might be controversial, and they have also taken
     steps to prevent a vendor from classifying a book under a
     particular heading (i.e., Judaica,) without that classification
     coming under B&N's scrutiny. Moreover, Mr. Simon has asked me to
     prepare a review of "Protocols" and he will post it on the web site
     as the first review. He also proposed that I include URL's to sites
     that would advise readers about the nature of propaganda, hate
     literature, and so forth. Lastly, he advised me that the company is
     considering setting up a new classification called "propaganda,"
     "hate literature," or something like that. That would ensure that
     hate literature (sic!) doesn't inadvertently pop up in the wrong
     section. I want to commend Barnes and Noble for cleaning up their
     own act, and I also want to commend the many of you out there who
     have taken the time to let B&N know of your concern. More than
     anything else, it proves that this is a company that listens to its
     customers, and that's what good business is all about.
     
     Rabbi Eric A. Silver
     
   Similar comments were raised about Amazon.com, which prompted the ADL
   to raise the issue to Amazon's corporate office. Here is the result,
   as documented by the ADL at
   http://www.adl.org/frames/front%5Fprotocols%5Fzion.html:
   
     New York, NY, March 28, 2000...
     
     The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) said today that Amazon.com and
     Barnes & Noble.com have agreed to prominently place on their Web
     sites ADL's statement that The Protocols of the Learned Elders of
     Zion is an anti-Semitic Czarist forgery. ADL said the online
     booksellers would state that they do not endorse the views
     expressed in the book or the publisher's description should one
     appear, which Amazon.com has had instituted for some time. Abraham
     H. Foxman, ADL National Director, issued the following statement:
     
     We are pleased that Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble.com have
     responded positively to our concerns and those of the public, and
     have instituted ways to alert their customers to the fact that the
     Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion is a forgery. Since we are
     not in the business of banning books, no matter how reprehensible
     they may be, we sought and achieved the best solution to inform
     book buyers. Both Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble.com have
     demonstrated corporate responsibility and we commend them for it.
     
     Following is ADL's statement on the Protocols which will appear on
     Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble.com:
     
     "From the Anti-Defamation League: The Protocols of the Learned
     Elders of Zion, circulated by the Czarist secret police at the turn
     of the 20th century, is plainly and simply a plagiarized forgery.
     The Protocols has been a major weapon in the arsenals of
     anti-Semites around the world, republished and circulated by
     individuals, hate groups and governments to convince the gullible
     as well as the bigoted that Jews have schemed and plotted to take
     over the world."
     
     In addition, Barnes and Noble bookstores will no longer shelve The
     Protocols under "Judaica," but under "World History."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 17.1: Are groups calling themselves "Jews for Jesus" or
         "Messianic Jews[sic]" Jewish movements?

Answer:
   
   No. Once you start reading their literature that they mail available
   to members (and on their web pages), it is clear that they are
   Christian organizations whose intent it to bring Jews to Christianity.
   Sadly, for many of these organizations, their membership includes
   persons who are technically Jewish, but who believe and practice
   Christianity.
   
   This is illustrated best by some examples:

     * Jews for Jesus. The following is a description of the
       Jews-for-Jesus ministry, from the member profile page of the
       Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability
       (http://www.ecfa.org/mbrprof.asp?memberid=207):
       
     Jews for Jesus is an outreach by Jewish Christian evangelists. Our
     methods vary from conventional missionary work like personal
     visitation and tract distribution to large display media ads
     proclaiming Christ in secular newspapers and magazines.

     * Messianic Judaism. Messianic Jews are organized into the Messianic
       Jewish Alliance of America (http://www.mjaa.org/). The description
       of this organization at the "About MJAA" page
       (http://www.mjaa.org/about.ihtml) clearly states as a goal:
       
     Most importantly--To introduce our Jewish brothers and sisters to
     the Messiah Yeshua.
       
   Both of these organizations, and other similar groups, are clearly
   missionary organizations whose goal is to bring Jesus to the Jewish
   people.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 17.2: Is belief in Jesus-as-God compatible with any Jewish
         movements?

Answer:
   
   No. There are many problems when one tries to reconcile belief in
   Jesus as the Messiah or the "Son of God" with traditional Jewish
   beliefs. A good description of the problems is found in the essay "Why
   Jews Can't Be For Jesus" by Rabbi Shmuel Arkush, Head of Operation
   Judaism in the United Kingdom. The essay may be found at
   http://www.ed.ac.uk/~jsoc/chadash/jesus.htm; some of the key points
   are repeated below:

     * Christians believe in the Trinity, that G-d consists of the
       Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. They say that this three-part
       G-d is the same as the G-d worshipped by the Jews. However, Torah
       says, "Hear O Israel, the L-rd is our G-d the L-rd is One." This
       is the watchword of our faith from Deut.. One cannot reconcile a
       single G-d with a three-part G-d.

     * Christians believe that one cannot approach G-d except through
       Jesus; therefore, all prayers must be in Jesus' name. However,
       Torah, in the Ten Commandments, says "I am the L-rd your G-d, who
       brought you out of the land of Egypt, from the house of slavery.
       You shall have no other gods before me". By praying to Jesus as a
       mediator, one is putting Jesus before God.

     * Christians say that Jesus was a Prophet who came to change the way
       it used to be. Torah says: "If there arise among you a prophet or
       a dreamer and he gives you a sign or a miracle. And the sign or
       miracle comes to pass and he calls you saying 'Let us go after
       other gods, whom you have not known and let us worship them.' You
       shall not listen to that prophet or dreamer. For G-d is testing
       you, to see whether you love the L-rd your G-d with all your heart
       and with all your soul." (Deut. 13:2)
       
   All Jewish groups agree that organizations such as Jews for Jesus and
   Messianic Judaism are not Judaism. Consider the following responsa
   from the Central Conference of American Rabbis, the Reform Rabbinic
   organization:
   
     Individuals who feel a vague attachment to one or another religion
     pose no problem for those religious groups who leave identification
     solely in the hands of the individual. Judaism, however, does not
     do so. It is not the individual who defines whether she is Jewish
     but the group. For us in the Jewish community anyone who claims
     that Jesus is their savior is no longer a Jew and is an apostate.
     Through that belief she has placed herself outside the Jewish
     community. Whether she cares to define herself as a Christian or as
     a "fulfilled Jew", "Messianic Jew," or any other designation is
     irrelevant; to us, she is clearly a Christian. It is true that this
     individual may be somewhat different form other Christians as she
     continues to follow certain Jewish practices and folkways, but we
     should remember that various Christian sects do likewise. For
     example, the Seventh Day Adventists observe shabbat as their day of
     rest. There are some Black Christian groups who also follow
     specifically Jewish observances, and there have been other groups
     like this in the past centuries.
     
   The concluding paragraph of the responsa says:
   
     [They] should be seen as outsiders who have placed themselves
     outside the Jewish community. This should be made clear to them and
     to the Jewish and general community, especially as many such
     individuals are active proselytizers. Such individuals should not
     be accorded membership in the congregation or treated in any way
     which makes them appear as if they were affiliated with the Jewish
     community, for that poses a clear danger to the Jewish community
     and also to its relationships with the general community. We
     certainly do not want these individuals to speak for Judaism in any
     public forum. In conclusion, we should make the distinction between
     ourselves and these individuals very clear to them, to the Jewish
     community, and to the general community around us.
     
   This is also the position within the state of Israel. According to the
   law of the State of Israel, "Messianic Jews" are considered members of
   another religion and therefore ineligible to make aliyah to Israel as
   Jews. The "Messianic Jews" took their cases to the Israeli Supreme
   Court on more than one occasion, and every time the verdict was loud
   and clear - they're not Jewish!

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 17.3: What do missionary groups believe?

Answer:
   
   Important Note: It should be pointed out that not all Christian groups
   conduct missionary activities, and that not all missionary groups
   target Jews. The questions in this section are focused primarily on
   those groups that target Jews for missionary activities, and use a
   Jewish basis for this targeting.
   

                                     **
                                      
   With respect to the beliefs of missionary groups, their own statements
   express their beliefs. Although beliefs vary between the various
   groups that missionize, clear examples of the goals of these groups
   can be found in the ministry statements for such groups that are on
   file at the Evangelical Council for Financial Accountabily (ECFA)
   <http://www.ecfa.org/>:

     * The Friends of Israel Gospel Ministry, Inc.: Friends of Israel
       Gospel Ministry is an evangelical faith ministry proclaiming the
       need for personal salvation through faith in Jesus Christ to
       Jewish people and their Gentile
       neighbors.(http://www.ecfa.org/mbrprof.asp?memberid=685)

     * Jews for Jesus: Jews for Jesus is an outreach by Jewish Christian
       evangelists. (http://www.ecfa.org/mbrprof.asp?memberid=207)

     * Light of Messiah Ministries: Light of Messiah Ministries exists
       for two purposes. First we want to overcome the misunderstanding
       that Jesus is not for the Jewish people. We want to help our
       people know that Jesus is our Messiah and that the most Jewish
       thing that anyone can do is believe in Him. We also want to help
       our brothers and sisters in Messiah understand the Jewish roots of
       their faith in Jesus.
       (http://www.ecfa.org/mbrprof.asp?memberid=1249)

     * Shoresh USA, Inc.: Shoresh teaches the Church to reclaim its
       Jewish roots, so that it is encouraged in deeper discipleship and
       equipped to share the Gospel with the Jewish people. Shoresh
       reaches Jewish people with the Good News of their Messiah, Jesus
       of Nazareth, so that they will receive Him with joy and fulfill
       their unique calling to bear the Gospel message to the world.
       (http://www.ecfa.org/mbrprof.asp?memberid=105)

     * Chosen People Ministries: The purpose of Chosen People Ministries
       is to serve the Messiah in fulfilling the Great Commission with
       specific emphasis on the Jewish people.
       (http://www.ecfa.org/mbrprof.asp?memberid=9)
       
   The beliefs of the organizations are also clear once you start looking
   at the doctrinal statemenst on the organizations websites. For
   example, one can learn quite a bit about the real Jews for Jesus by
   visiting their web page at http://www.jewsforjesus.org/, or the home
   page of the Messianic Jewish Alliance for America at
   http://www.mjaa.org/. Their statements found on these pages are both
   candid and Christian:

     * Jews for Jesus:
       The Jews for Jesus statement of faith, at
       http://www.jewsforjesus.org/about/faith.htm, says that members of
       Jews for Jesus believe that the Scriptures of the Old and New
       Testaments [emphasis added by FAQ maintainer] are divinely
       inspired, contain no errors and are the final authority in matters
       of faith and life. Although members of Jews for Jesus recognize
       "the value of traditional Jewish literature," they do so only
       insofar as "it is supported by or conformable to the Word of God."
       (Note that, by their definition of the New Testament as divinely
       inspired, this "Word of God" includes the words of Jesus).
       However, Jews for Jesus regard this literature (including books
       such as the Talmud) as "in no way binding upon life or faith."
       According to this statement, although members of Jews for Jesus
       believe only in one God, they believe it exists in three persons:
       a father, a son, and a Holy Spirit (which goes counter to Jewish
       theology). They believe that God had a physical son, and gave that
       son for the redemption of the world (again, counter to Jewish
       theology, but a key aspect of Christian theology). The doctrinal
       statement goes on to express the belief that Jesus is the messiah
       (according to Jewish theology, the messiah has not yet arrived),
       and is "co-equal with God". They believe that Jesus was born
       through "the virgin birth", led a "sinless life", and they hold
       with the concepts of Jesus' atoning death, burial, and bodily
       resurrection. All of these are key Christian theological elements,
       but not part of Judaism.
       The Jews for Jesus doctrine believes that all human beings, with
       the exception of Jesus, are sinners by nature and practice, and
       that Jesus died for the sins of humanity. Again, key Christian
       concepts.

     * Messianic Jews:
       The Messianic Jewish Alliance for America statement of faith, at
       http://www.mjaa.org/StatementOfFaith.ihtml, says that the Tenach
       and the later writings commonly known as the B'rit Hadasha (New
       Covenant) are the only infallible and authoritative word of God.
       It indicates that they accept the teachings of those documents as
       their final authority in all matters of faith and practice. These
       are the approximately the same words as Jews for Jesus; as with
       Jews for Jesus, they include the words of Jesus and his disciples
       as "divinely inspired". In terms of belief, although they hold
       with God as defined by the Shema, they believe that God exists as
       a trinity. More significantly, the hold with basic Christian
       doctrine: "Messiah Yeshua's deity (Is. 9:6, John 1:1,4), His
       virgin birth (Is. 7:14), His sinless life, His atoning death (Is.
       53, Ps. 22), His bodily resurrection, His ascension, and His
       future return in power and glory." They also believe that all
       Christians are Jewish: "Gentiles who place their faith in Yeshua,
       are "grafted into" the Jewish olive tree of faith (Rom. 11:17-25)
       becoming spiritual sons and daughters of Abraham (Gal. 3:28-29)."
       
   Remember these excerpts when a Hebrew-Christian tries to claim that
   his or her practice is Judaism. The reality is that the belief is not
   Jewish (the Jewish belief is one undivided God, and that the Messiah
   has not yet arrived) and that the goal is to serve as a witness for
   Christianity to the Jews ("....introduce to the Jewish people...")
   
   If an MJ is technically Jewish, try teaching the MJ about Judaism,
   which teaches that one should love one's neighbor as oneself, that one
   should not bear a grudge, that the righteous of all nations have a
   share in the world to come, that G-d is close to all who sincerely
   call, and that the Messiah will usher in a time of peace.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 17.4: What sort of deceptive terminology do missionaries
         use?

Answer:
   
   First and foremost, groups such as these often usurp Jewish
   terminology and practices. On the surface, the claim is that they do
   this because they are "completed Jews". For example:

     * They no longer call their places of worship churches, but use the
       words like synagogue, "Beit Knesset", "Kehillah".

     * They hide all the crosses and use Menorahs and Stars of David
       instead.

     * They often parade around with Torah scrolls while praying to
       Jesus.

     * Many wear "kipot" (Jewish head coverings) and prayer shawls.

     * They celebrate Jewish holidays like the Passover Seder, but
       pervert their meaning by claiming that theirs (Christian) is the
       real meaning of Jewish customs and traditions. By doing this, they
       negate, distort, or ignore their real origins and significance.

     * They call their leaders 'Rabbis'.

     * They refer to Jesus as Yeshua, to make him sound Jewish.
       
   Why do they do this? Recall that such groups consider both the Tanach
   and the Christian Gospel as the word of G-d. In the Christian Gospel,
   I Corinthians 9:20, it says: "To the Jews I became like a Jew, to win
   the Jews. To those under the law I became like one under the law
   (though I myself am not under the law), so as to win those under the
   law. To those not having the law I became like one not having the law
   (though I am not free from God's law but am under Christ's law), so as
   to win those not having the law. To the weak I have become weak, to
   win the weak. I have become all things to all men so that by all
   possible means I might save some." [New International Version]
   
   In other words, they're trying to sell Christianity in the guise of
   Judaism.
   
   Christians believe that through faith in Jesus a person is saved. The
   Christian has the perspective that this is such a singularly important
   thing, above all and any other thing in life--or, for that matter, in
   death--that any regard or concern for others (which is a fundamental
   part of his commitment to and love for God) that he persuade others to
   at the very least Hence, there is a strong emphasis to save people by
   bringing others to Christianity. For many of them, messianic
   synagogues are the answer. This allows, in their words, "Jews to
   become Christians while still remaining Jews and cherishing their
   Jewish ancestry. Swedish Americans cherish their Swedish ancestry.
   Chinese Americans treasure their Chinese ancestry. Hebrew Americans
   ought to cherish their Hebrew ancestry and remain strongly Jewish.".
   Missionaries proclaim, "I am a Jew. I go to synagogue. I invite you to
   my synagogue. It meets on Friday evening." They then make those to
   attend those "synagogues" feel right at home. But recall their mission
   statements: their goal is to bring the Jew to Christianity.
   
   Note that it is not just Jews that feel the practices of these groups
   are deceptive. The following are some quotes from a FAQ on such groups
   by Yad Lachim (http://www.yadlachim.org/messianic/messianic.htm):

     * In 1977, the Board of Governors of the Long Island Council of
       Churches (New York) accused "Jews for Jesus" of "engaging in
       subterfuge and dishonesty," and of "mixing religious symbols in
       ways that distort their essential meaning." "Jews for Jesus" filed
       a suit in a State Supreme Court in Manhattan against a 600-member
       Council. The Rev. Jack Alford, the executive director of the
       Council, said the suit "proves the point we were making about
       their tactics." He added: "The mentality of 'Jews for Jesus' is
       the kind of mentality that has been spawn in some fascist and
       communist countries." Eventually, the lawsuit was rejected by
       court. (The New York Times, July 2, 1977)

     * In the summer of 1987 in Washington D.C. (USA), there was held an
       Interfaith Conference of Metropolitan Washington. Partaking in the
       conference were representatives of various Protestant churches,
       Roman-Catholics, together with Moslems and representatives of
       Jewish organizations. The Conference concluded with an official
       statement (published in "Interfaith Connector" Vol. 8, No. 2)
       which stated:
       
     "We condemn proselytizing efforts which delegitimize the faith
     tradition of the person whose conversion is being sought. Such
     tactics go beyond the bounds of appropriate and ethically based
     religious outreach.
     Examples of such practices are those common among groups that have
     adopted the label of Hebrew Christianity, Messianic Judaism, or
     Jews for Jesus. These groups specifically target Jews for
     conversion to their version of Christianity, making claim that in
     accepting Jesus as the savior/messiah, a Jews 'fulfills' his/her
     faith. Furthermore, by celebrating Jewish festivals, worshipping on
     the Jewish Shabbat, appropriating Jewish symbols, rituals and
     prayers in their churches, and, sometimes, even calling their
     leaders 'Rabbi', the seek to win over, often by deception, many
     Jews who are sincerely looking for a path back to their ancestral
     heritage.
     Deceptive proselytizing is practiced on the most vulnerable of
     populations - residents of hospitals and old aged homes, confused
     youth, college students away from home. These proselytizing
     techniques are tantamount to coerced conversions and should be
     condemned."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 17.5: How can these missionaries be countered?

Answer:
   
   Numerous books have been written on the subject, see the Antisemitism
   portion of the reading list. Above all else, be prepared. Support Jews
   for Judaism(r) and other counter-missionary organizations. Jews for
   Judaism(r) is a Jewish organization worldwide (with branches in Canada,
   South Africa, and soon-to-be branches in Australia and Israel) which
   opposes cults and missionary efforts directed at Jews. Jews for
   Judaism(r) is North America's only full-time educational, outreach and
   counseling organization dedicated to countering the multi-million
   dollar efforts of groups such as Jews for Jesus. Their offices serves
   as Crisis Intervention Centers to help those in need and promote
   Jewish continutity. They are not specific to a single movement in
   Judaism; they unite Jews of diverse backgrounds, and have earned the
   endorsement of a wide sectrum of Jewish community agencies, leaders,
   and rabbis. Their contact information can be found below:
   
    JEWS FOR JUDAISM
    
   Website: http://www.jewsforjudaism.org/

     * Canada, Ontario, Toronto
       Julius Ciss & Rabbi Michael Skobac
       2795 Bathurst.
       PO Box 41032
       Toronto, Ontario, Canada M6B 4J6
       Voice: (905) 761-0040
       FAX: (905) 761-0070
       toronto@jewsforjudaism.org

     * South Africa, Raedene
       Rabbi Graeme Finkelstein
       PO Box 51525
       Raedene
       South Africa
       southafrica@jewsforjudaism.org
       Voice: 2711-485-4865

     * USA, California, Los Angeles
       Rabbi Bentzion Kravitz & Mark Sanders [Main Office]
       P.O.Box 351235
       Los Angeles, CA
       90035-1235
       la@jewsforjudaism.org
       Voice: (310) 854-3381
       FAX: (310) 854-3662

     * USA, District of Columbia, Washington D.C.
       Scott Hillman
       scott@jewsforjudaism.org
       Voice: (301) 649-5494

     * USA, Illinois, Chicago
       Voice: (630) 415-1874
       chicago@jewsforjudaism.org

     * USA, Maryland, Baltimore
       Mark Powers & Scott Hillman
       P.O. Box 15059
       Baltimore, MD. 21282
       baltimore@jewsforjudaism.org
       Voice: (410) 602-0276
       FAX: (410) 602-0578

     * USA, New York, New York City
       Gerald Sigal
       Voice: 212-633-2125
       Address: PO Box 117
       Forest Hills, NY 11375
       newyork@jewsforjudaism.org

     * USA, Pennsylvania, Harrisburg
       Mark Powers
       Voice:(717) 233-5397
       harrisburg@jewsforjudaism.org

     * USA, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
       Voice: (215) 627-2272
       philadelphia@jewsforjudaism.org
       
   In general, missionaries are closed-minded, obstinate, and illogical,
   relying upon memorization rather than reason. Debate with missionaries
   takes place on the alt.messianic newsgroup, not soc.culture.judaism or
   any s.c.j newsgroup.
   
    Other Resources
    
   There are a number of other resources available. First, consult your
   local federation council, and see if they have a Task Force on
   Missionaries and Cults. Some other organizations that have a web
   presence include:

     * Torah Life and Living (http://www.tll.org/). TLL also provides a
       National Anti-Cult Anti-Missionary Hotline at 1-800-572-0372 or
       1-877-ANTICULT. TLL provides anti-cult, anti-missionary exit
       counseling that helps re-expose Jews to their Jewish Heritage, and
       helps to heal families shattered by messianics, missionaries, and
       cults.

     * The Jerusalem Institute of Bible Polemics
       (http://jibp.israel.net/index.html). This is an organization that
       reaches out to the Jewish Community worldwide and offers its
       expertise in dealing with the problems caused by missionaries who
       seek to win Jewish souls.

     * Yad L'achim (http://www.yadlachim.org/). This organization offers
       guidance, advice, direction, and solving problems of Israeli
       citizens, young and old, who have become trapped in the clutches
       of missionaries and mystic cults.

     * The Task Force on Missionaries and Cults (http://www.tforce.org/).
       The leading counter-missionary and cult organization in North
       America and is the leader in providing information and assistance
       to individuals and communities in the U.S., Europe, and Israel

     * Derech Emet (http://members.aol.com/DerechEmet/). A group working
       to save Jews from missionaries and cults. Support is provided in
       both English and Russian.

     * Outreach Judaism (http://www.outreachjudaism.org/). An
       organization dedicated to bringing Jews back from the Church.
       
   Lastly, the Being Jewish web page (http://www.beingjewish.com)
   maintains a list of Anti-Missionary Web Sites at
   http://beingjewish.com/anti-missionary-links.html.
   
   Note: Jews for Judaism(r) is a registered trademark of Jews for Judaism
   International, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 17.6: Who is financing "Jews for Jesus" and similar groups?

Answer:
   
   The Evangelical Council for Financial Responsibility
   (http://www.ecfa.org/) is a wonderful resource for seeing what some of
   these organizations are spending, for the fiscal year ending
   12/31/1998 (unless noted otherwise):

     * Jews for Jesus:

          + Income:
               o Total: $13,628,190;
               o Donated: $9,670,903

          + Expenses:
               o Program Services $9,273,284
               o General and Administrative $1,923,136
               o Fund Raising $649,963

     * Friends of Israel Gospel Ministry, Inc.:

          + Income:
               o Total $7,670,172
               o Donated $5,959,927
               o Expenses:
                    # Program Services $5,167,787
                    # General and Administrative $1,466,107
                    # Fund Raising $211,058

     * Chosen People Ministries (FY Ending 6/30/1999):

          + Income:
               o Total $5,087,207
               o Donated $4,453,785

          + Expenses:
               o Program Services $4,178,096
               o General and Administrative $1,044,101
               o Fund Raising $439,296

     * Messianic Vision, Inc.:

          + Income:
               o Total $1,823,514
               o Donated $1,246,100

          + Expenses:
               o Program Services $1,116,585
               o General and Administrative $471,663
               o Fund Raising $43,694

     * Shoresh USA, Inc.:

          + Income:
               o Total $812,777
               o Donated $226,095

          + Expenses:
               o Program Services $579,669
               o General and Administrative $33,920
               o Fund Raising $3,405

     * Light of Messiah Ministries:

          + Income:
               o Total: $314,878
               o Donated: $261,541

          + Expenses:
               o Program Services: $120,375
               o General and Administrative $87,444
               o Fund Raising $38,778
       
   Some other considerations:

     * The amount of donated funds does not equal the total income from
       the group. What are the other sources of monies?

     * Every member of the board of the UMJC (Union of Messianic Jewish
       Congregations) is ordained and a member of a mainline Christian
       church. Most are either AOG (Assemblies of G-d) or Baptist.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.08.12 07:58


End of SCJ FAQ Part 9 (Holocaust, Antisemitism, and Missionaries) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:13 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yk-000OVzC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:10 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05142
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:44 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 79AF77A140
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:15 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 1392E7A115
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:09 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28080 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:33 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:33 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032533.28079.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 10-Reform
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 176360
Lines: 3520

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Reform Judaism (10/12)
Followup-To: poster
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.reform>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/10-Reform
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Questions about Reform Judaism: Truths and untruths
Message-ID: <faq.reform_970855621@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/10-Reform
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.10-Reform
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

	   Frequently Asked Questions on Reform/Progressive Judaism
                    [Last Post: Fri Oct  6 11:07:16 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.


     Special Introduction to the Reform/Progressive Portion of the FAQ
                                      
   This portion of the FAQ is drawn primarily from published positions of
   the Union of American Hebrew Congregations (UAHC) and the Central
   Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR) -- the primary organizations for
   Reform Judaism in North American. As such, the positions represented
   here are collectively those of the Reform movement, as canonized by
   its leadership. Individuals in the movement have personal positions
   that differ, some more traditional, some more liberal.
   
   The positions in this part of the FAQ primarily reflect those of North
   American Reform Jewry. Where appropriate and when it differs,
   clarifications about Reform/Progressive practice outside of North
   America is provided. Additional clarifications of this sort are always
   welcome.
   
   Again, as with any group, there are individuals who do not follow the
   recommendations of the movement, and yet associate themselves with the
   movement. This occurs in all aspects of Judaism. Remember to
   distinguish the individual from the movement, and strive to encourage
   those living with a less-than-serious commitment to their movement to
   strengthen that commitment. Throughout the remainder of this posting,
   unless otherwise qualified, the phrase "Reform Jew" refers to an
   individual committed to Reform Judaism and acting in accordance with
   the recommendations of Reform Judaism.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   Reform Reading List. Similar questions can be found in the books
   referenced in those lists.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:


     * Introduction to the Reform/Progressive FAQ
       
    1. General Questions
         1. What is Reform Judaism? 
         2. What, if any, are the fundamental principles of Reform? 
         3. Is a Jew affiliated with Reform Judaism less "religious" than
            one affiliated with another movement? 
         4. How is Reform Judaism structured in the North America? 
         5. How is Reform Judaism structured in the rest of the world? 
         6. How big is Reform Judaism? 
    2. History 
         1. How did Reform Judaism start? 
         2. Why did Reform Judaism start? 
         3. I've heard reference to "Classic German Reform". What is it? 
         4. What is Reform Judaism today? 
    3. What is Reform Judaism's position on... 
         1. The authority of Torah? 
         2. The authority of Talmud? 
         3. What is acceptable practice? 
         4. What is unacceptable practice? 
         5. The necessity of belief in God? 
         6. The role of Israel? 
         7. Other Jewish movements? 
         8. Homosexuality 
         9. Intermarriage 
        10. Abortion 
        11. Mixed (Interfaith) Marriages 
        12. The role of women 
        13. Outreach 
        14. How an individual's Jewish status is determined 
        15. The Messiah 
    4. Stereotypes: The fallacy verses reality 
         1. Fallacy: Reform Jews choose practice based solely on
            convenience 
         2. Fallacy: Either patrilineal or matrilineal descent is
            accepted 
         3. Fallacy: Reform Conversions take no study, and are for
            convenience only 
         4. Fallacy: Reform Judaism encourages intermarriage 
         5. Fallacy: Intermarried couples have exactly the same rights as
            non-intermarried couples in Reform Congregations 
         6. Fallacy: Reform Judaism has Rabbis and congregations that
            don't believe in God 
         7. Fallacy: There are no 3rd or 4th generation Reform Jews. 
         8. Fallacy: An atheist could be considered a "good" Reform Jew 
         9. Fallacy: Reform Jews don't have Bar Mitzvahs 
        10. Fallacy: Reform totally ignores "Jewish" divorce (i.e., gets)
        11. Fallacy: All Reform Congregations Are Rich 
        12. Fallacy: Reform Rabbis do not study Halacha 
        13. Fallacy: Reform Jews don't care about Jewish ideals and
            principles. 
        14. Fallacy: Reform Jews don't need to attend synagogue. 
        15. Fallacy: Reform Jews don't believe in Zionism and don't
            support Israel. 
        16. Fallacy: Reform Jews have no concept of the Messiah. 
        17. Fallacy: Reform Jews do not observe Shabbat 
        18. Fallacy: Reform Jews ignore the laws of Kashrut 
        19. Fallacy: Reform rejects most of Maimonides 13 Principles of
            Faith 
    5. Differences from Traditional Judaism 
         1. Why does Reform liturgy say "m'chayey hakol" [who gives life
            to all] instead of m'chayey meytim" [who gives life to the
            dead] ? 
         2. What other changes to liturgy reflect Reform ideals? 
         3. Why does Reform generally celebrate Rosh Hashanah for one
            day? 
         4. How does a Reform conversion differ from an Orthodox
            conversion? 
    6. The Rabbinate 
         1. How does one become a Reform Rabbi? 
         2. What is the course of study for the Rabbinate? 
         3. How does one become a Reform Cantor? 
         4. What is the course of study for cantors? 
         5. What other courses of study are available? 
         6. Can Reform Rabbis be sanctioned for their beliefs 
    7. For Further Information 
         1. How do I contact the main organizations in Reform Judaism? 
         2. How do I find a Reform congregation? 
         3. Are there any Reform Rabbis on the network who will answer
            questions? 
         4. How do I start the conversion process? 
         5. I'd like to do some further reading. Where do I start? 
       

     * Special Credits for the Reform/Progressive FAQ 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.1.1: What is Reform Judaism?

Answer:
   
   Reform is the most liberal of the major movements within Judaism
   today. It started in the 1800s in Germany during the emancipation, and
   encouraged examination of religion with an eye towards rationality and
   egalitarianism.
   
   Reform differs from the other major movements in that it views both
   the Oral and Written laws as a product of human hands (specifically,
   it views the Torah as Divinely inspired, but written in the language
   of the time in which it was given). The laws reflect their times, but
   contain many timeless truths. The Reform movement stresses retention
   of the key principles of Judaism (as it sees them; for details,
   consult the Reform Reading List). As for practice, it strongly
   recommends individual study of the traditional practices; however, the
   adherent is free to follow only those practices that increase the
   sanctity of their relationship to G-d. Reform also stresses equality
   between the sexes.
   
   Reform Judaism shares the universal Jewish emphasis on learning, duty,
   and obligation rather than creed as the primary expression of a
   religious life. Reform stresses that ethical responsibilities,
   personal and social, are enjoined by God. Reform also believes that
   our ethical obligations are but a beginning; they extend to many other
   aspects of Jewish living, including: creating a Jewish home centered
   on family devotion; life-long study; private prayer and public
   worship; daily religious observance; keeping the Sabbath and the holy
   days; celebrating the major events of life; involvement with the
   synagogue and community; and other activities that promote the
   survival of the Jewish people and enhance its existence. Within each
   aspect of observance Reform Judaism demands Jews confront the claims
   of Jewish tradition, however differently perceived, and to exercise
   their individual autonomy--based, as the Sh'ma says, upon reason,
   heart, and strength--choosing and creating their holiness as people
   and as community. The requirement for commitment and knowledge is
   repeatedly emphasized. A Reform Jew who determines their practice
   based on convenience alone is not acting in accordance with the
   recommended position of Reform Judaism. Reform also rejects the faith
   tenets of other religions as a matter of first principles.
   
   It should be noted that many of the paths taken by the Reform movement
   differ from those of traditional Judaism. These differences result in
   many of the discussions you will see on S.C.J.
   
   Here are some references to some other statements about "What is
   Reform Judaism?":

     * "What is Reform Judaism": http://rj.org/rj.html. Statement on the
       UAHC Web Page

     * "A Statement of Principles for Reform Judaism":
       http://ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html. Statement adopted by
       the CCAR in 1999

     * "Why Be Reform?": http://uahc.org/yoffie/whyref.html. A statement
       by UAHC President Eric H. Yoffie

     * A New Era For Reform: http://rj.org/uahc/rjmag/397dr.html. A
       letter that appeared in Reform Judaism magazine
       
   In terms of size, the UAHC 1993-1994 annual report notes that there
   were a total of 853 UAHC-affiliated congregations, with a total
   reported congregational membership of 302,193 member units (families,
   singles, etc.). This can be contrasted with the 1983-1984 period,
   where there were 773 congregations with a total of 269,406 member
   units. Congregations range in size from a 2-member-unit congregation
   in Port Gibson, Mississippi, to "mega"-shuls such as Wilshire Blvd
   Temple in Los Angeles (2,123 member units), Anshe Chesed in Cleveland
   Ohio (2,151), Holy Blossom Temple in Toronto Ontario (2,043), Temple
   Israel in Minneapolis Minnesota (2,075), Washington Hebrew
   Congregation in Washington DC (2,783), Congregation Emanu-El in New
   York City (2,650), Temple Israel in W. Bloomfield Michigan (2,659),
   Temple Emanu-El in Dallas Texas (2,526), and Cong. Beth Israel in
   Houston Texas (2,011).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.1.2: What, if any, are the fundamental principles of
         Reform?

Answer:
   
   The fundamental principles of today's Reform movement are captured in
   the Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html) adopted by the CCAR
   in May 1999. The following are some excepts from that statement,
   modified slightly for FAQ presentation (e.g., "We" was changed to
   "Reform Jews", etc.). Note that the principles of Reform have changed
   over time, from the 1855 Pittsburgh Platform
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/pittsburgh.html) to the 1937
   Columbus Platform (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/columbus.html), to
   the 1976 Centenary Perspective
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html), to the 1999
   Statement of Principles.
   
    God
    

     * Reform Jews affirm the reality and oneness of God, even as we may
       differ in our understanding of the Divine presence.

     * Reform Jews affirm that the Jewish people is bound to God by an
       eternal b'rit, covenant, as reflected in our varied understandings
       of Creation, Revelation and Redemption.

     * Reform Jews affirm that every human being is created b'tzelem
       Elohim, in the image of God, and that therefore every human life
       is sacred.

     * Reform Jews regard with reverence all of God's creation and
       recognize our human responsibility for its preservation and
       protection.

     * Reform Jews encounter God's presence in moments of awe and wonder,
       in acts of justice and compassion, in loving relationships and in
       the experiences of everyday life.

     * Reform Jews respond to God daily: through public and private
       prayer, through study and through the performance of other
       mitzvot, sacred obligations -- bein adam la Makom, to God, and
       bein adam la-chaveiro, to other human beings.

     * Reform Jews strive for a faith that fortifies us through the
       vicissitudes of our lives -- illness and healing, transgression
       and repentance, bereavement and consolation, despair and hope.

     * Reform Jews continue to have faith that, in spite of the
       unspeakable evils committed against our people and the sufferings
       endured by others, the partnership of God and humanity will
       ultimately prevail.

     * Reform Jews trust in our tradition's promise that, although God
       created us as finite beings, the spirit within us is eternal.
       
    Torah
    

     * Reform Jews affirm that Torah is the foundation of Jewish life.

     * Reform Jews cherish the truths revealed in Torah, God's ongoing
       revelation to our people and the record of our people's ongoing
       relationship with God.

     * Reform Jews affirm that Torah is a manifestation of ahavat olam,
       God's eternal love for the Jewish people and for all humanity.

     * Reform Jews affirm the importance of studying Hebrew, the language
       of Torah and Jewish liturgy, that we may draw closer to our
       people's sacred texts.

     * Reform Jews are called by Torah to lifelong study in the home, in
       the synagogue and in every place where Jews gather to learn and
       teach. Through Torah study Reform Jews are called to mitzvot, the
       means by which we make our lives holy.

     * Reform Jews are committed to the ongoing study of the whole array
       of mitzvot and to the fulfillment of those that address us as
       individuals and as a community. Some of these mitzvot, sacred
       obligations, have long been observed by Reform Jews; others, both
       ancient and modern, demand renewed attention as the result of the
       unique context of our own times.

     * Reform Jews bring Torah into the world when we seek to sanctify
       the times and places of our lives through regular home and
       congregational observance. Shabbat calls us to bring the highest
       moral values to our daily labor and to culminate the workweek with
       kedushah, holiness, menuchah, rest and oneg, joy. The High Holy
       Days call us to account for our deeds. The Festivals enable us to
       celebrate with joy our people's religious journey in the context
       of the changing seasons. The days of remembrance remind us of the
       tragedies and the triumphs that have shaped our people's
       historical experience both in ancient and modern times. And we
       mark the milestones of our personal journeys with traditional and
       creative rites that reveal the holiness in each stage of life.

     * Reform Jews bring Torah into the world when we strive to fulfill
       the highest ethical mandates in our relationships with others and
       with all of God's creation. Partners with God in tikkun olam,
       repairing the world, we are called to help bring nearer the
       messianic age. We seek dialogue and joint action with people of
       other faiths in the hope that together we can bring peace, freedom
       and justice to our world. We are obligated to pursue tzedek,
       justice and righteousness, and to narrow the gap between the
       affluent and the poor, to act against discrimination and
       oppression, to pursue peace, to welcome the stranger, to protect
       the earth's biodiversity and natural resources, and to redeem
       those in physical, economic and spiritual bondage. In so doing, we
       reaffirm social action and social justice as a central prophetic
       focus of traditional Reform Jewish belief and practice. We affirm
       the mitzvah of tzedakah, setting aside portions of our earnings
       and our time to provide for those in need. These acts bring us
       closer to fulfilling the prophetic call to translate the words of
       Torah into the works of our hands.
       
    Israel
    

     * Reform Jews are Israel, a people aspiring to holiness, singled out
       through our ancient covenant and our unique history among the
       nations to be witnesses to God's presence. We are linked by that
       covenant and that history to all Jews in every age and place.

     * Reform Jews are committed to the mitzvah of ahavat Yisrael, love
       for the Jewish people, and to k'lal Yisrael, the entirety of the
       community of Israel. Recognizing that kol Yisrael arevim zeh
       ba-zeh, all Jews are responsible for one another, we reach out to
       all Jews across ideological and geographical boundaries.

     * Reform Jews embrace religious and cultural pluralism as an
       expression of the vitality of Jewish communal life in Israel and
       the Diaspora.

     * Reform Jews pledge to fulfill Reform Judaism's historic commitment
       to the complete equality of women and men in Jewish life.

     * Reform Jews are an inclusive community, opening doors to Jewish
       life to people of all ages, to varied kinds of families, to all
       regardless of their sexual orientation, to gerim, those who have
       converted to Judaism, and to all individuals and families,
       including the intermarried, who strive to create a Jewish home.

     * Reform Jews believe that we must not only open doors for those
       ready to enter our faith, but also to actively encourage those who
       are seeking a spiritual home to find it in Judaism.

     * Reform Jews are committed to strengthening the people Israel by
       supporting individuals and families in the creation of homes rich
       in Jewish learning and observance.

     * Reform Jews are committed to strengthening the people Israel by
       making the synagogue central to Jewish communal life, so that it
       may elevate the spiritual, intellectual and cultural quality of
       our lives.

     * Reform Jews are committed to Medinat Yisrael, the State of Israel,
       and rejoice in its accomplishments. We affirm the unique qualities
       of living in Eretz Yisrael, the land of Israel, and encourage
       aliyah, immigration to Israel.

     * Reform Jews are committed to a vision of the State of Israel that
       promotes full civil, human and religious rights for all its
       inhabitants and that strives for a lasting peace between Israel
       and its neighbors.

     * Reform Jews are committed to promoting and strengthening
       Progressive Judaism in Israel, which will enrich the spiritual
       life of the Jewish state and its people.

     * Reform Jews affirm that both Israeli and Diaspora Jewry should
       remain vibrant and interdependent communities. As we urge Jews who
       reside outside Israel to learn Hebrew as a living language and to
       make periodic visits to Israel in order to study and to deepen
       their relationship to the Land and its people, so do we affirm
       that Israeli Jews have much to learn from the religious life of
       Diaspora Jewish communities.

     * Reform Jews are committed to furthering Progressive Judaism
       throughout the world as a meaningful religious way of life for the
       Jewish people.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.1.3: Is a Jew affiliated with Reform Judaism less
         "religious" than one affiliated with another movement?

Answer:
   
   Religion is a personal matter of belief, and just as there is a wide
   spectrum of underlying belief (regardless of outward practice) in
   other movements, there is in Reform Judaism.
   
   Practice is a different question. Although Reform permits a wide
   variety of practice--indeed, fully traditional practice could be
   accomodated in Reform if it was the result of honest study--the
   normative practice of American Reform Jewish is less ritualistic than,
   for example, Orthodox practice. This is a logical consequence of
   Reform's emphasis upon kevanah or devotion as an essential part of
   Jewish ritual and practice. The notion is that rituals and practices
   mean more if one is committed to their reason and significance,
   emotional, rational, and spiritual.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.1.4: How is Reform Judaism structured in the North
         America?

Answer:
   
   In North America, the principal organization for Reform Jewry is the
   Union of American Hebrew Congregations (UAHC) (http://uahc.org). UAHC
   was founded in 1873 by Rabbi Isaac Meyer Wise, and serves as the
   umbrella organization for Reform Synagogues throughout North America.
   
   UAHC funds a seminary system for Reform Judaism: the Hebrew Union
   College--Jewish Institute for Religion (http://huc.edu). HUC was
   founded in 1875, and it now has campuses in Cincinnati, Ohio (+1 513
   221 1875); New York City, New York (+1 212 674 5300); Los Angeles,
   California (+1 213 749 3424); and Jerusalem ISRAEL (+972 2 232 444).
   See http://www.huc.edu/campuses.html for specifics.
   
   UAHC works with a number of professional organizations:

     * CCAR. The CCAR or Central Conference of American Rabbis (founded
       in 1889) [http://ccarnet.org]. Its members are the body of rabbis
       who consider themselves and are considered to be the organized
       rabbinate of Reform Judaism. Its members consist of Reform Rabbis
       ordained at the Hebrew Union College (HUC), as well as Reform
       Rabbis ordained at liberal seminaries in Europe, and some rabbis
       who joined the Reform movement sometime subsequent to ordination
       (most of these were ordained either at Conservative Judaism's
       Jewish Theological Seminary or University of Judaism, or at the
       Reconstructionist Rabbinical College). Note that not all HUC
       graduates are CCAR members; some leave for ideological reasons or
       because they have joined a different movement. The CCAR publishes
       a quarterly rabbinic journal called CCAR Journal.

     * ACOC. American Conference of Cantors (http://rj.org/acc/). The ACC
       is the professional organization of over two hundred fifty
       invested and/or certified cantors. Responsible for raising the
       professional standards of synagogue musicians, the ACC offers
       continuing education programs in conjunction with HUC-JIR School
       of Sacred Music and professional development opportunities for its
       members. Members of the ACC have special expertise in the music of
       the Jewish people and serve synagogues and communities in
       pastoral, worship, programming, and educational roles. The ACC
       sponsors an annual convention and publishes Koleinu, a monthly
       newsletter. It also offers placement services to its members and
       UAHC congregations through the Joint Cantorial Placement
       Commission.

     * NATA. National Association of Temple Administrators
       (http://rj.org/nata/). The National Association of Temple
       Administrators is the professional organization founded in 1941
       for those who serve Reform Synagogues as executives,
       administrators, or managers. The title does not reflect the
       international make up of the organization, currently there are
       more than 400 members from the United States, Australia, Canada
       and Great Britain.

     * NATE. National Association of Temple Educators
       (http://rj.org/nate/). NATE. is the professional organization of
       Educators serving congregations of the Reform Movement as
       Directors of Education, Principals, Department Heads, Preschool
       Directors and Family Educators. Many NATE. members also serve on
       the professional staff of Bureaus and Central Agencies of Jewish
       Education. A growing number of NATE. Educators direct Reform or
       Community Jewish Day Schools.
       
   UAHC works with a number of special-interest groups:

     * WRJ. Women of Reform Judaism (formerly National Federation of
       Temple Sisterhoods) [http://www.rj.org/wrj/]. Women of Reform
       Judaism, The Federation of Temple Sisterhoods, representing
       100,000 women in 600 local Sisterhoods throughout the United
       States, Canada, and thirteen other countries, is the women's
       agency of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, the central
       body of Reform Judaism in North America.

     * NFTB. National Federation of Temple Brotherhoods
       (http://www.rj.org/nftb). NFTB is a coalition of over 250
       affiliated brotherhoods with 30,000 members across North America,
       dedicated to tikkun olam, 'repairing the world', through the
       practice of Brotherhood. NFTB members are actively involved in
       youth education, adult education, social action, and fellowship
       activities which contribute to the enrichment of their synagogue
       community.

     * PARDeS. The Progressive Organization of Reform Day Schools
       (http://www.rj.org/pardes). PARDeS brings together days schools
       and professional and lay leaders committed to advancing the cause
       of full-time Reform Jewish Education. PARDeS fosters Jewish
       identity, literacy and continuity through Jewish education in
       Reform Day Schools...Promotes a life-long covenant with the
       heritage of Judaism...And, advocates for excellence in education,
       (secular and Jewish).

     * ARZA/World Union. Association of Reform Zionists of America/World
       Union (http://www.rj.org/arzawuna) The mission of ARZA/WORLD
       UNION, North America is to further the development of Progressive
       Judaism in Israel and throughout the world. ARZA/WORLD UNION,
       North America strives to strengthen Jewish communities by
       encouraging Jewish solidarity, promoting religious pluralism and
       furthering Zionism. ARZA/WORLD UNION, North America is working to
       strengthen the relationship of North American Reform Jews with
       Progressive Jewish communities in Israel and throughout the world
       and to educate and inform our constituency on relevant matters of
       Jewish importance. ARZA/WORLD UNION, North America is the
       representative of the World Union for Progressive Judaism and an
       affiliate of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations.

     * NFTY. North American Federation of Temple Youth
       (http://www.rj.org/nfty/). NFTY is the youth arm of the Union of
       American Hebrew Congregations, and is comprised of over 450 Temple
       Youth Groups (TYGs) throughout the United States and Canada. The
       overall purposes of NFTY are to instill Jewish identity, foster
       commitment to the ideals and values of Reform Judaism, and
       increase synagogue participation in high school youth, pursued in
       a framework that emphasizes the development of personal and
       leadership skills in a wholesome, social, Jewish environment.

     * KESHER. Reform Jewish Student Organization
       (http://www.keshernet.com). KESHER is the college movement of
       North American Reform Judaism, an affiliate of the Union of
       American Hebrew Congregations that connects college-aged Reform
       Jews, Reform college groups, and college campuses to each other
       and to the Reform movement, in order to promote continuous
       involvement in Reform Judaism.

     * Berit Mila Board (http://www.rj.org/beritmila/). A joint project
       of HUC, CCAR, and UAHC. An organization of Reform Judaism whose
       goal is to train mohelim.
       
   At the political level, Reform Judaism in the US is respresented by:

     * RAC. Religious Action Center (http://rj.org/rac/). The Religious
       Action Center of Reform Judaism (RAC) has been the hub of Jewish
       social justice and legislative activity in the nation's capital
       for over 35 years. It has educated and mobilized the American
       Jewish community on legislative and social concerns as an advocate
       in the Congress of the United States on issues ranging from Israel
       and Soviet Jewry to economic justice and civil rights, to
       international peace and religious liberty. The RAC is the
       Washington office of the Union of American Hebrew Congregation
       (UAHC) and the Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR),
       representing 1.5 million Reform Jews and 1,800 Reform rabbis in
       870 congregations throughout North America.
       
   In Canada, Reform Congregations are members of the Canadian Council
   for Reform Judaism (http://www.uahcweb.org/regs/cc/). CCRJ represents
   approximately 9000 households in 24 affiliated congregations from
   Montreal to Calgary. The CCRJ is the Canadian region of the Union of
   American Hebrew Congregations.
   
   The CCRJs mandates are:
    1. To promote the aims and objectives of member congregations
    2. To promote and assist in the formation of new liberal
       congregations in Canada
    3. To represent the Union of American Hebrew Congregations in Canada
    4. To promote and represent liberal Judaism in Canada
       
   At the International Level, Reform Judaism is represented by the
   following:

     * WUPJ. World Union for Progressive Judaism
       (http://www.rj.org/wupj). The World Union for Progressive Judaism
       was founded in London in 1926 as the international organization to
       promote and sustain liberal Judaism, its practices and ideas. Over
       1.5 million Reform, Liberal, Progressive, and Reconstructionist
       congregations are affiliated with the movement in over 35
       countries and on six continents. From its central office in
       Jerusalem, the World Union brings back Judaism to countries where
       former Nazi and communist tyrannies sought to stamp out Jews and
       Judaism forever. It also introduces disaffected Jews in many parts
       of the world to an open and questioning expression of Judaism to
       which they can relate.

     * ARZENU. International Federation of Reform and Progressive
       Religious Zionists (http://www.irac.org/arzenu/).

     * IRAC. The Israel Religious Action Center (http://www.irac.org/)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.1.5: How is Reform Judaism structured in the rest of the
         world?

Answer:
   
   The world organization for Reform Judaism is the World Union for
   Progressive Judaism (http://www.rj.org/wupj/), which is headquartered
   in Jerusalem. Outside of North America, Reform is also known as
   "Progressive" or "Liberal" Judaism. A list of all the affiliates of
   the WUPJ may be found at http://uahc.org/cgi-bin/wupjaffil.pl; this
   list includes members from Australia, New Zealand, China, Hong Kong,
   India, Singapore, Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany,
   Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, UK, Former Soviet Union, Belarus,
   Georgia, Estonia, Ukraine, Russia, Israel, Argentina, Aruba, Bahamas,
   Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatamala, Honduras, Jamaica,
   Panama, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Saint Maarten, St. Thomas,
   USA, Canada, and South Africa.
   
   The confusion about the terms "Reform" or "Liberal" comes from a split
   in England's Reform movement. In 1842 the English Reform movement
   split into two factions, one of which was more traditional, while the
   other was more liberal. The more traditional Reform Judaism faction
   called themselves simply 'Reform'. Their prayer services are much more
   traditional than the faction that split off, and their laity is in
   general more observant than the other faction. Thus their prayer
   services are much like American Conservative shuls and English Masorti
   shuls, but they still are what we Americans call Reform (i.e.
   Classical halakha is not considered binding by its rabbinate or
   laity.) The more liberal Reform Judasim faction seceded, and renamed
   their movement as "Liberal Judaism". They are are more in the mode of
   Classic German Reform. They generally have less Hebrew in their
   services, and are less observant.
   
   Progressive Jewish congregations are to be found throughout the Jewish
   world, from Europe to Asia, from South America to India and from
   Africa to Australasia. In Israel, in addition to urban congregations,
   there are also two Progressive kibbutzim and a Progressive village
   settlement.
   
   Where appropriate there are regional umbrella organizations such as
   the Australian and New Zealand Union for Progressive Judaism
   (http://www.anzupj.com.au); the Union of Progressive Jews in Germany,
   Austria and Switzerland; Union of Liberal Jewish Congregations in the
   Netherlands (http://www.xs4all.nl/~ljg), etc. The following are some
   specific regional notes:

     * United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, Progressive/Reform Judaism
       is represented by the Union of Liberal and Progressive Synagogues
       (http://www.ulps.org/), known generally as the Liberal movement.
       As part of a process of becoming part of the Progressive movement,
       some Liberal Synagogues changed their name from Liberal to
       Progressive some years back. Yet the distinctions are difficult to
       draw.
       Members of reform congregations in the UK are likely to see
       themselves closer in beliefs to the US Reform movement and not to
       the Conservative. In halachic terms, little now separates the UK
       Reform and Liberal movements, and *both* are affiliated to WUPJ.
       Indeed proposals to merge the two movements arise from time to
       time. The Leo Baeck College is sponsored by both movements, and
       its graduates officiate in both Liberal and Reform synagogues.
       The differences between the two are largely historical. The Reform
       movement developed in the UK independent of the classical German
       liberal trend. The West London Synagogue was established in the
       early 1800's as a breakaway from the Sephardi Bevis Marks
       synagogue in the City of London, so that wealthy jews who had
       moved to the affluent West End district of London had a convenient
       place of worship. Its liturgy adapted to cope with the desire for
       a degree of assimilation and less harsh observence of this class
       of English jewry! A number of congregations throughout the UK over
       time adopted the West London prayerbook. With the outbreak of the
       Second World War, these congregations got together to deal with
       issues of jewish education in the context of children being
       evacuated to the countryside. The Reform Synagogues of Great
       Britain (http://www.refsyn.org.uk) (the umbrella organisation for
       the Reform movement) dates from this time. Leo Baeck College was
       founded by RSGB (who were later joined by ULPS) in order to
       re-build the European rabbinate following the shoa - and the
       destruction of progressive seminaries in continental Europe. Leo
       Baeck College may be reached at:
       
    The Sternberg Centre For Judaism
    80 East End Road
    London N3 2SY
    Tel: +44-181-349-4525
    Fax: +44-181-343-0901
       The Liberal movement (and the Liberal Jewish Synagogue) was
       founded in the early part of this century by Lily Montague as an
       adjunct to the then Reform synagogues - with the intention that
       the use of more English in services, etc would prevent some on the
       margins of British jewry assimilating completley and being totally
       lost. The Liberal movement owes more to classical German liberal
       jewry. Reform practices tend to be somewhat more Orthadox than the
       Liberal - (e.g. wearing of tallit, the form of some prayers), but
       when you get down to fundamentals, there is not much in it - as
       the sharing of a rabinnical seminary shows.
       The Masorti movement corresponds more closely to US conservative
       practice in its interpretation of halacha and the from of its
       services.
       The UK CCAR equivalent is The Reform Synagogues of Great Britain
       (http://www.refsyn.org.uk).
       The International Youth Movement, Netzer Olami, has active
       branches of Netzer (acronym: No'ar Tzioni Reformi - Reform Zionist
       Youth) throughout the world. In the UK, contact ULPSNYC-Netzer,
       <R.L.Reese@sheffield.ac.uk> or <Beccy@brij000.demon.co.uk>. There
       is also a growing Dayschool movement in a number of countries.
       
   The WUPJ is a constitutent of the World Zionist Organization, and the
   political Zionist arm of Progressive Judaism--ARTZENU--has active
   constituents in most contries.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.1.6: How big is Reform Judaism?

Answer:
   
   According to the 1993-1994 yearbook of the Union of American Hebrew
   Congregations, there are 853 member congregations, with a total
   "member unit" membership of 302,193 member units. The term "member
   units" refers to the unit that joins a synagogue: a family, a single
   individual, a gay couple. There are also numerous congregations that
   are Reform but are not affiliated with UAHC. Some of these are quite
   large (such as Steven S. Wise Congregation in Los Angeles, with over
   2,000 member units). The breakdown, according to the yearbook, is as
   follows:
   
        Region                          Congregations           Members
        Canada                          22                        8,252
        Great Lakes                     57                       22,785
        Mid Atlantic                    62                       20,289
        Midwest                         65                       23,401
        New Jersey/W. Hudson            58                       20,829
        New York                        94                       36,122
        Northeast                       78                       26,605
        Northeast Lakes                 69                       23,660
        Northern California             40                       15,137
        Pacific Northwest               18                        5,002
        Pacific Southwest               73                       32,257
        Pennsylvania                    55                       19,721
        Southeast                       85                       28,397
        Southwest                       77                       19,736
        TOTAL                          853                      302,193

   To give an idea of trends, in 1982-1983, the congregational membership
   was 269,406--that's 12% growth over ten years. There were 773 member
   congregations in 1982-1983, giving 10% growth in the number of Reform
   congregations.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.2.1: History: How did Reform Judaism start?

Answer:
   
   The roots of Reform/Liberal/Progressive Judaism lie in Germany, where,
   between 1810 and 1820, congregations in Seesen, Hamburg, and Berlin
   instituted fundamental changes in traditional Jewish practices and
   beliefs, such as mixed seating, the use of German in services,
   single-day observance of festivals, and use of a cantor/choir.
   
   American Reform Judaism began as these German "reformers" immigrated
   to American in the mid-1800s. Reform rapidly became the dominant
   belief systems of American Jews of the time. It was a national
   phenomenon. The first "Reform" group was formed by a number of
   individuals that split from Cong. Beth Elohim in Charleston SC.
   
   According to an article in the Spring 1994 CCAR Journal, the following
   are early American Jewish congregations, and the dates they became
   Reform congregations:
   
   Congregation                    City            Date Became Reform
   Beth Elohim                     Charleston SC           1825
   Har Sinai                       Baltimore MD            1842
   Emanu-El                        New York NY             1845
   Beth El/Anshe Emeth             Albany NY               1850
   Bene Yeshurun (I.M. Wise)       Cincinnati OH           1854
   Adath Israel (The Temple)       Louisville KY           1855
   Bene Israel (Rockdale)          Cincinnati OH           1855
   Keneseth Israel                 Philadelphia PA         1856
   Sinai                           Chicago IL              1858

   Reform in American benefitted from the lack of a central religious
   authority. It also was molded by Rabbi Isaac Mayer Wise. Rabbi I.M.
   Wise came to the US in 1846 from Bohemia, spent eight years in Albany
   NY, and then moved to Cincinnati on the edge of the frontier. He then
   proceeded to...
    1. Write the first siddur edited for American worshippers, Minhag
       American (1857)
    2. Found the Union of American Hebrew Congregations in 1873
    3. Found Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati in 1875
    4. Found the Central Conference of American Rabbis in 1889
       
   Early Reform, led by Rabbis such as David Einhorn of Baltimore, Samuel
   Holdheim, Bernard Felsenthal, and Kaufmann Kohler, took an
   increasingly radical stance. Many rituals and customs were dropped,
   some congregations held "Shabbat" on Sunday. This early radicalism was
   mentioned in the 1855 Pittsburgh Platform
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/pittsburgh.html).
   
   By 1880, over 90% of American Synagogues were Reform. This was the
   time of the major Eastern European immigration, which was heavily
   Orthodox and non-German, as contrasted with the strongly German Reform
   movement. Many Reform congregations of this time were difficult to
   distinguish from neighboring Protestant churches, with preachers in
   robes, pews with mixed seating, choirs, organs, and hymnals. Yet by
   1935, Reform had started on the path of return to a more traditional
   approach to Judaism--distinctly Jewish and distinctly American, but
   also distinctively non-Christian.
   
   Reform pioneered a number of Jewish organizations, such as the
   Educational Alliance on the Lower East Side of New York, the Young
   Men's Hebrew Association, the American Jewish Committee, and the ADL
   of B'nai Brith.
   
   Although early Reform dropped quite a bit of traditional prayers and
   rituals, there was still a "bottom line". In 1909, the CCAR formally
   declared its opposition to intermarriage. And, although decried as
   "archaic" and "barbarian", the practice of circumcision remained a
   central rite.
   
   Early Reform was also anti-Zionist, believing the Diaspora was
   necessary for Jews to be "light unto the nations". Yet with this, a
   number of Reform Rabbis were pioneers in establishing Zionism in
   American, such as Gustav and Richard Gottheil, Rabbi Steven S Wise
   (founder of the American Jewish Congress), and Justice Louis Brandeis.
   Following the Balfour Declaration, Reform began to support Jewish
   settlements in Palestine, as well as institutions such as Hadassah
   Hospital, and the Hebrew University. In 1937, the Columbus Platform
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/columbus.html) affirmed "the
   obligation of all Jewry to aid in building a Jewish homeland...".
   
   Since 1937, Reform has remained active on the social action front. It
   has also been moving back to tradition. This is described in more
   detail elsewhere in the FAQ.
   
   [Much of this adapted from "The Jewish Almanac", Richard Siegel and
   Carl Rheins]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.2.2: History: Why did Reform Judaism start?

Answer:
   
   To answer this question, one must look at the environment in which
   Reform was born. This was the time of the French Revolution, a time
   when European Jews were (for the first time), recognized as citizens
   of the countries in which they lived. Ghettos were being abolished,
   special badges were no more, people could settle where they pleased,
   dress as they liked, and follow the occupations that they wanted.
   
   Many Jews settled outside of Jewish districts, and began to live like
   their neighbors and speak the language of the land. They went to
   public schools and univeristies, and began to neglect Jewish studies
   and to disregard the Shulchan Aruch.
   
   In 1815, after Napolean's defeat, Jews lost the rights of citizenship
   in many countries. Many Jews became Christian in order to retain those
   rights. Many thoughtful Jews were concerned about this. They relized
   that many of these changes took place not because of a dislike of
   Judaism, but in order to obtain better treatment. Many rabbis believed
   that the way to address this was to force Jews to keep away from
   Christians and give up public schools and universities. This didn't
   work.
   
   Leopold Zunz proposed something else. He suggested that Jews study
   their history, and learn of the great achievements of the past. At the
   same time as Zunz was implementing his ideas, a movement began to make
   religious services better understood, by incorporating music and the
   local language. However, these changes had to battle the local Rabbis,
   who urged the government to close the test synagogue.
   
   Shortly after the closing, Rabbi Abraham Geiger suggested that
   observance might also be changed to appeal to modern people. Geiger, a
   skilled scholar in both Tanach and German studies, investigated Jewish
   history. He discovered that Jewish life had continually changed. Every
   now and then, old practices were changed and new ones introduced,
   resulting in a Jewish life that was quite different than that lived
   4000 or even 2000 years before. He noticed that these changes often
   made it easier for Jews to live in accordance with Judaism.
   
   Geiger concluded that this process of change needed to continue in
   order to make Judaism attractive to all Jews. He met with other Rabbis
   in Germany, and changes began as described in Section 18.2.1.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.2.3: History: I've heard reference to "Classic German
         Reform". What is it?

Answer:
   
   When Reform started, many of its leaders took a very "rejectionist"
   view of practice. Many traditional practices were decried as
   "barbaric", and many other practices were discarded. This "early form"
   of Reform had some of the following characteristics:

     * Circumcision was not practiced, and was decried as barbaric.

     * The Hebrew language was removed from the liturgy and replaced with
       German.

     * The hope for a restoration of the Jews in Israel was officially
       renounced, and it was officially stated that Germany was to be the
       new Zion.

     * The ceremony in which a child celebrated becoming Bar Mitzvah was
       removed, and replaced with a "confirmation" ceremony.

     * The laws of Kashrut and family purity were officially declared
       "repugnant" to modern thinking people, and were not observed.

     * Shabbat was observed on Sunday.

     * Traditional restrictions on Shabbat behavior were not followed.
       
   (Note that almost all of the items in the above list are not
   reflective of Reform thought today.)
   
   In 1885 the Reform movement held its Pittsburg Conference, which
   produced the original platform of Reform Judaism. This platform,
   called the 1855 Pittsburgh Platform
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/pittsburgh.html), is still followed
   by a few congregations today. This platform dismisses "such Mosaic and
   rabbinical laws as regulate diet, priestly purity and dress" as
   anachronisms that only obstruct spirituality in the modern age, and
   stressed that Reform Jews must only be accepting of laws that they
   feel "elevate and sanctify our lives" and must reject those customs
   and laws that "not adapted to the views and habits of modern
   civilization." In the decades following these events, a reevaluation
   took place in which many members of the Reform movement began to
   question the "reforms" that were made. This is indicative how the
   movement operates, and why it is called "Reform" and not
   "Reformed"--because the process of reform is a continual one. Starting
   with the Columbus Platform
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/columbus.html), many of the
   discarded practices were reincorporated into Reform, and consistute
   what is now called "Modern" Reform Judaism, or more succinctly, Reform
   Judaism.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.2.4: History: What is Reform Judaism today?

Answer:
   
   [Adapted from Rabbi Eugene Borowitz's Liberal Judaism...]
   
   As described elsewhere in this FAQ, Reform Jews believe that human
   beings are responsible for both the Written and the Oral Torah. The
   sacred texts and contemprorary sages have much to teach us, but do not
   legislate for us. Reform Jews insist on the freedom to determine for
   themselves the aspects of faith they will continue to observe, and
   what in their belief requires the creation of new forms.
   
   This freedom can be broken into two periods. The first period,
   sometimes called "Classic Reform", runs from the start of Reform
   Judaism until around the 1960s. It can be characterized by the notion
   of what Rabbi Borowitz calls "negative freedom". In other words,
   Reform Jews of this time defined themselves by their right *not to do*
   what traditional Jews considered mandatory.
   
   Beginning in the 1960s (although there were elements as far back as
   1920) and continuing to the present day is the period of what is
   called Modern Reform, and Rabbi Borowitz characterizes as "positive
   freedom". In other words, today's Reform Jews use religious
   self-determination to add to their religious observance. Previously
   rejected or neglected traditions are readopted, and new ones are
   created to express growing Jewish sensibilities. This is reflected in
   the 1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.1: Reform's Position On...The authority of Torah?

Answer:
   
   The 1937 Columbus Platform of Reform Jewry
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/columbus.html) expressed the
   position that Torah results from the relationship between God and the
   Jewish people. The records of our earliest confrontations are uniquely
   important to us. Lawgivers and prophets, historians and poets gave us
   a heritage whose study is a religious imperative and whose practice is
   our chief means to holiness. Rabbis and teachers, philosophers and
   mystics, gifted Jews in every age amplified the Torah tradition. For
   millennia, the creation of the Torah has not ceased and Jewish
   creativity in our time is adding to the chain of tradition.
   
   The platform went on to say that God is revealed not only in the
   majesty, beauty and orderliness of nature, but also in the vision and
   moral striving of the human spirit. Revelation is a continuous
   process, confined to no one group and to no one age. Yet, the people
   of Israel, through its prophets and sages, achieved unique insight in
   the realm of religious truth. The Torah, both written and oral,
   enshrines Israel's ever-growing consciousness of God and of the moral
   law. It preserves the historical precedents, sanctions and norms of
   Jewish life, and seeks to mold it in the patterns of goodness and of
   holiness. Being products of historical processes, certain of its laws
   have lost their binding force with the passing of the conditions that
   called them forth. But as a repository of permanent spiritual ideals,
   the Torah remains the dynamic source of life of Israel. Each age has
   the obligation to adapt the teachings of the Torah to its basic needs
   in consonance with the genius of Judaism
   
   This position is echoed again in the current (1999) statement of
   principles (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html), which
   says:

     * We affirm that Torah is the foundation of Jewish life.

     * We cherish the truths revealed in Torah, God's ongoing revelation
       to our people and the record of our people's ongoing relationship
       with God.

     * We affirm that Torah is a manifestation of (ahavat olam), God's
       eternal love for the Jewish people and for all humanity.

     * We affirm the importance of studying Hebrew, the language of Torah
       and Jewish liturgy, that we may draw closer to our people's sacred
       texts.

     * We are called by Torah to lifelong study in the home, in the
       synagogue and in every place where Jews gather to learn and teach.
       Through Torah study we are called to (mitzvot), the means by which
       we make our lives holy.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.2: Reform's Position On...The authority of Talmud?

Answer:
   
   [Based on material in Contemporary American Reform Responsa by Rabbi
   Walter Jacob, publ. by CCAR]:
   
   Reform Judaism views the rabbinic past as a historical development.
   The "Oral Law" is not seen as divinely given at Sinai, but rather as a
   reflection of Judaism's historic development and encounter with God in
   each succeeding generation. In this, Reform follows Zunz, Geiger,
   Frankel, Graetz, and others in viewing God working through human
   agents. Reform believes that each generation has produced capable and
   religiously inspired teachers (this means that Reform rejects the
   often expressed view that assigns greater holiness to those who lived
   in the past). Some individuals of our generation may equal or exceed
   those of the past.
   
   Historical and sociological studies of the rabbinic literature during
   the last two centuries have illuminated it. Reform Judaism view this
   vast literature as the product of human reaction to varying needs
   motivated by religious thought and the divine impulse. Reform Judaism
   feels no necessity to justify each segment of the literature in terms
   of every other portion as done through hidushim and pilpul. Reform
   sees the differences among Talmudic and later authorities as
   reflections of particular points of view, different understandings of
   the divine mandate, as well as the needs of specific groups within
   their Jewish communities.
   
   When Reform Judaism analyzes each period of history, it discovers
   different strands in the halakhah. These appear both in the decisions
   and underlying philosophy. Traditional Judaism has chosen a single
   path and rejected the others, but we recall the existence of the other
   paths and the fact that they were suggested and followed by loyal Jews
   in the past. Reform Judaism feels that diversity has always been the
   hallmark of our literature and our people. Thus, when Reform finds
   itself facing new situations, it turns both to the mainstream of
   rabbinic thought as well as its divergent paths for halakhic guidance.
   In Reform's view, the halakhah is a vast repository whose old debates
   are often relevant to new situations.
   
   Sometimes the solutions of Reform Judaism may parallel those of past
   generations. On other occasions, Reform diverges from them. Through
   this effort, Reform Judaism seeks solutions for generations living in
   lands distant and distinct from those of the ancient Near East or
   medieval Europe.
   
   Reform Judaism recognizes that not every question can be resolved by
   reviewing the rabbinic literature; in some instances, totally new
   legislation is appropriate. That may be buttressed by rabbinic
   precedent.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.3: Reform's Position On...What is acceptable practice?

Answer:
   
   Reform Judaism maintains the principle of individual freedom; each Jew
   must make a personal decision about the Judaism which has come down
   through the ages. Nevertheless, all Jews who acknowledge themselves to
   be members of their people and its tradition thereby limit their
   freedom to some extent. [From Gates of Mitzvot]
   
   This sounds general. It is. As the 1976 Centenary Statement
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html) says, Reform Jews
   are subject to both ethical responsibilities (both personal and
   social), as well as obligations in many other aspects of Jewish living
   (creating a Jewish home; life-long study; private prayer and public
   worship; observance of holidays, etc.) Within each area of Jewish
   observance Reform Jews must confront and study Jewish tradition, and
   exercise their individual autonomy.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.4: Reform's Position On...What is unacceptable
         practice?

Answer:
   
   As one might imagine, the emphasis on freedom and autonomy in Reform
   Judaism could lead one to an "anything goes" position. However,
   anything doesn't go. The Reform Responsa literature is full of
   examples of unacceptable practice/practices; here are a few:

     * "Current medical fashions are irrelevant in this matter as we
       consider circumcision to be a religious rite, not a health
       measure. Unless ill health or serious medical problems prevent the
       circumcision of a male infant on the eighth day, he should be
       circumcised on that day. If such a child is not circumcised, he
       would nevertheless be considered a Jew [but] it would be incumbant
       upon such an individual to be circumcised later in life."
       [American Reform Responsa #54]

     * "For us in the Jewish community anyone who claims that Jesus is
       their savior is no longer a Jew and is an apostate... Such
       individuals should not be accorded membership in the congregation
       or treated in any way which makes them appear as if they were
       affiliated with the Jewish community..." [Contemporary American
       Reform Responsa, #68]

     * When asked if a Jewish lady could be a bridesmaid at a Christian
       wedding, the answer as "The young lady may attend as a bridesmaid
       but she may not kneel or do anything whicy may be considered as
       participation in a Christian worship service." [Contemporary
       American Reform Responsa, #168]

     * Contemporary American Reform Responsa, #118 implies that
       headstones in a Jewish cemetary must not have Christian symbols.

     * "Mind altering drugs... may not be used by Jews to induce a
       ``heightened sense of religious awareness'' or to seek a mystical
       experience." [Contemporary American Reform Responsa, #74]
       
   However, just because an individual does something unacceptable or
   holds a belief different than the movement's recommendation does not,
   a priori, make them no longer a Reform Jew. As Rabbi Plaut wrote
   "Persons of varying shadings of belief or unbelief, practice or
   non-practice, may belong to UAHC congregations as individuals."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.5: Reform's Position On...The necessity of belief in
         God?

Answer:
   
   [Adapted from Rabbi Eugene Borowitz's Liberal Judaism]
   
   Belief in God is not a problem to some people. They simply know that
   God exists and nothing shakes their faith. Most of us are not like
   that. We'd like to believe in God, and sometimes think that we do,
   only to find ourselves questioning again. It is clear that in Judaism,
   belief in God has not usually meant complete and unwavering certainty.
   This is demonstrated throughout Torah. In Judaism, faith in God is
   dynamic; it is not an all-or-nothing, static state of being.
   
   So, does Reform require belief in God? There are no ideological tests
   administered; each person's belief is private. Yet in terms of the
   movement, Reform believes in God. This belief has been demonstrated
   from the earliest days of the movement; specifically, the Pittsburgh
   Platform (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/pittsburgh.html) in 1885
   said "We hold that Judaism presents the highest concept of the
   God-idea as taught in our holy Scriptures." It was reaffirmed in 1937
   in the Columbus Platform
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/columbus.html): "The heard of
   Judaism and its chief contribution to religion is the doctrine of the
   One, living God, who rules the world through law and love.". It was
   reaffirmed yet again in 1976
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html): "The affirmation of
   God has always been essential to our people's will to survive.".
   
   The strength of this conviction at the level of the congregation was
   confirmed again recently. In 1990, a congregation in Cincinatti Ohio
   applied for membership in UAHC. This congregation practices "Judaism
   with a humanistic perspective". It had been briefly involved with the
   Society for Humanistic Judaism, but had found them to be too
   atheistic. The congregation sees itself as a Jewish group, but its
   liturgy deletes any and all mention of God, either in the Hebrew or in
   English. This liturgy doesn't include Kiddish or Kaddish, Barechu,
   Shema, Ve'ahavta, Amidah, or Aleinu. Their philosophy doesn't admit of
   either Covenant or commandments (as demonstrated by their haggadah,
   which in Echad Mi Yode'a, replaces the traditional "Two tables of the
   Covenant" with "two people in the Garden of Eden". The responsa
   committee, in response to this application, denied (although not
   unanimously) that this congregation was a Reform congregation. Rabbi
   Gunther Plaut, chair of the committee at the time, wrote:
   
     "Persons of varying shadings of belief or unbelief, practice or
     non-practice, may belong to UAHC congregations as individuals, and
     we respect their rights. But it is different when they come as a
     congregation whose declared principles are at fundamental variance
     with the historic God-orientation of Reform Judaism. ... But should
     we not open the gates wide enough to admit even such concepts into
     our fold? Are not diversity and inclusiveness a hallmark fo Reform?
     To this we would reply: yesh gevul, there are limits. Reform
     Judaism cannot be everything, or it will be nothing. The argument
     that we ourselves are excluded by the Orthodox and therefore should
     not keep others out who wish to join us has an attractive sound to
     it. Taken to its inevitable conclusion, however, we would end up
     with a Reform Judaism in which "Reform" determines what "Judaism"
     is and not the other way around."
     
   This position was reaffirmed at the UAHC Board of Trustees meeting in
   1994, which voted 115-13-4 to reject the application for membership.
   Note that in neither case was the rejection unanamous. Interested
   parties issued in the details of both sides of the argument should
   read the articles in the Winter 1994, Volume 23 Number 2, issue of
   "Reform Judaism" (http://www.uahcweb.org/rjmag/) published by UAHC.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.6: Reform's Position On...The role of Israel?

Answer:
   
   The position of Reform on the state of Israel is made clear in the
   1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html):

     * We are committed to (Medinat Yisrael), the State of Israel, and
       rejoice in its accomplishments.

     * We affirm the unique qualities of living in (Eretz Yisrael), the
       land of Israel, and encourage (aliyah), immigration to Israel.

     * We are committed to a vision of the State of Israel that promotes
       full civil, human and religious rights for all its inhabitants and
       that strives for a lasting peace between Israel and its neighbors.

     * We are committed to promoting and strengthening Progressive
       Judaism in Israel, which will enrich the spiritual life of the
       Jewish state and its people.

     * We affirm that both Israeli and Diaspora Jewry should remain
       vibrant and interdependent communities. As we urge Jews who reside
       outside Israel to learn Hebrew as a living language and to make
       periodic visits to Israel in order to study and to deepen their
       relationship to the Land and its people, so do we affirm that
       Israeli Jews have much to learn from the religious life of
       Diaspora Jewish communities.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.7: Reform's Position On...Other Jewish movements?

Answer:
   
   As can be seen by Reform's philosophy, as long as the participants in
   other Jewish movements feel their practice and beliefs bring them
   closer to God, there are no conflicts with Reform considering them
   Jewish movements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.8: Reform's Position On...Homosexuality

Answer:
   
   The position of North American Reform Jewry with respect to
   homosexuals, homosexuality, and the acknowledgement of homosexual
   relationships can be seen in the statements of the two key bodies of
   North American Reform Jewry, the CCAR and UAHC. These statements also
   show how the positions have both changed (in some aspects) and stayed
   the same (in some aspects) over time.
   
   In 1977, the CCAR (the organization of Reform Rabbis) adopted a
   resolution
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/resodisp.pl?file=rights&year=1977)
   calling for legislation decriminalizing homosexual acts between
   consenting adults, and calling for an end to discrimination against
   gays and lesbians. The resolution called on Reform Jewish
   organizations to develop programs to implement this stand. The same
   year, UAHC (the organization of Reform Congregations) issued a
   resolution that supported homosexuals, but did not encourage the
   lifestyle:
   
     ... resolved that homosexual persons are entitled to equal
     protection under the law. We oppose discrimination against
     homosexuals in areas of opportunity, including employment and
     housing. We call upon our society to see that such protection is
     provided in actuality.
     
     ... resolved that we affirm our belief that private sexual act
     between consenting adults are not the proper province of government
     and law enforcement agencies.
     
     ... resolved that we urge congregations to conduct appropriate
     educational programming for youth and adults so as to provide
     greater understanding of relation of Jewish values to the range of
     human sexuality.
     
   In response to this, in 1987, UAHC resolved that it would:
    1. Urge its congregations and affiliates to:
         a. Encourage lesbian and gay Jews to share and participate in
            worship, leadership, and general congregational life of all
            synagogues.
         b. Continue to develop educational programs in the synagogue and
            community which promote understanding and respect for
            lesbians and gays.
         c. Employ people without regard to sexual orientation.
    2. Urge the Commission on Social Action to bring its recommendations
       to the next General Assembly after considering the report of the
       CCAR committee and any action of the CCAR pursuant to it.
    3. Urge the Committee on Liturgy to formulate liturgically inclusive
       language.
       
   Then, in 1989, UAHC resolved to:
    1. Reaffirm its 1987 resolution and call upon all departments of the
       UAHC and our member congregations to fully implement its
       provisions.
    2. Embark upon a movement-wide program of heightened awareness and
       education to achieve the fuller acceptance of gay and lesbian Jews
       in our midst.
    3. Urge our member congregations to welcome gay and lesbian Jews to
       membership, as singles, couples, and families.
    4. Commend the CCAR for its sensitive and thorough efforts to raise
       the consciousness of the rabbinate regarding homosexuality. We
       urge the CCAR to pursue its own mandate with vigor and complete
       its tasks as soon as possible in order to respond to the communal
       and spiritual aspirations of gay and lesbian Jews.
       
   In 1990, the CCAR endorsed the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on
   Homosexuality and the Rabbinate. This position paper urged that "all
   rabbis, regardless of sexual orientation, be accorded the opportunity
   to fulfill the sacred vocation that they have chosen." The committee
   endorsed the view that "all Jews are religiously equal regardless of
   their sexual orientation." The committee expressed its agreement with
   changes in the admissions policies of the Hebrew Union College-Jewish
   Institute of Religion, which stated that the "sexual orientation of an
   applicant [be considered] only within the context of a candidate's
   overall suitability for the rabbinate," and reaffirmed that all
   rabbinic graduates of the HUC-JIR would be admitted into CCAR
   membership upon application. The report described differing views
   within the committee as to the nature of kiddushin, and deferred the
   matter of rabbinic officiation.
   
   A 1996 resolution resolved that the CCAR "support the right of gay and
   lesbian couples to share fully and equally in the rights of civil
   marriage," and voiced opposition to governmental efforts to ban gay
   and lesbian marriages. The resolution also said:
   
     Judaism places great emphasis on family, children, and the future,
     which is assured by a family. However we may understand
     homosexuality, whether as an illness, as a genetically based
     dysfunction or as a sexual preference and lifestyle - we cannot
     accommodate the relationship of two homosexuals as a "marriage"
     within the context of Judaism, for none of the elements of
     qiddushin (sanctification) normally associated with marriage can be
     invoked for this relationship.
     
   In addition to these resolutions, two CCAR committees have addressed
   the question of same-gender officiation. The CCAR Committee on
   Responsa addressed the question of whether homosexual relationships
   can qualify as kiddushin (which it defined as "Jewish marriage"). By a
   committee majority of 7 to 2, the committee concluded that "homosexual
   relationships, however exclusive and committed they may be, do not fit
   within this legal category; they cannot be called kiddushin. We do not
   understand Jewish marriage apart from the concept of kiddushin." The
   committee acknowledged its lack of consensus on this question.
   
   In 1998, The Ad Hoc Committee on Human Sexuality issued a report that
   included its conclusion, by a committee majority of 11 with 1
   abstention, that "kedushah may be present in committed same gender
   relationships between two Jews and that these relationships can serve
   as the foundation of stable Jewish families, thus adding strength to
   the Jewish community." The report called upon the CCAR to support all
   colleagues in their choices in this matter, and to develop educational
   programs. Note this change of position, from "cannot be" to "may be
   present". However, the report implied it is not present in all.
   
   More recently (March 2000), CCAR issued a new resolution addressing
   officiation of same-sex committment ceremonies. This resolution says:
   
     WHEREAS justice and human dignity are cherished Jewish values, and
     
     WHEREAS, in March of 1999 the Women's Rabbinic Network passed a
     resolution urging the Central Conference of American Rabbis to
     bring the issue of honoring ceremonies between two Jews of the same
     gender to the floor of the convention plenum, and
     
     WHEREAS, the institutions of Reform Judaism have a long history of
     support for civil and equal rights for gays and lesbians, and
     
     WHEREAS, North American organizations of the Reform Movement have
     passed resolutions in support of civil marriage for gays and
     lesbians, therefore
     
     WE DO HEREBY RESOLVE, that the relationship of a Jewish, same
     gender couple is worthy of affirmation through appropriate Jewish
     ritual, and
     
     FURTHER RESOLVED, that we recognize the diversity of opinions
     within our ranks on this issue. We support the decision of those
     who choose to officiate at rituals of union for same-gender
     couples, and we support the decision of those who do not, and
     
     FURTHER RESOLVED, that we call upon the CCAR to support all
     colleagues in their choices in this matter, and
     
     FURTHER RESOLVED, that we also call upon the CCAR to develop both
     educational and liturgical resources in this area.
     
   Rabbi Eric Yoffee of UAHC, on March 29, 2000, released the following
   statement in response to the March 2000 resolution:
   
     This afternoon the Central Conference of American Rabbis, meeting
     in Greensboro, NC, adopted a resolution by an overwhelming vote
     stating, in part, that "the relationship of a Jewish, same gender
     couple is worthy of affirmation through appropriate Jewish ritual."
     
     It is important to note what the resolution on same gender unions
     does and does not say. It does not compel any rabbi to officiate at
     such a ritual, and indeed supports the right of a rabbi not to
     officiate. It does not specify what ritual is appropriate for such
     a ceremony. It does not say that the ceremony performed should be
     called a "marriage."
     
     Nonetheless, the historical and religious significance of this
     resolution is indisputable. For the first time in history, a major
     rabbinical body has affirmed the Jewish validity of committed, same
     gender relationships.
     
     What do the members of UAHC congregations think about this
     resolution? It is impossible to know for certain. Some have told me
     of their strong support, while others have indicated their
     opposition. Still others have said that they are sympathetic to the
     ideas expressed but felt no resolution was necessary at this time.
     
     Over the last quarter century, the UAHC Biennial Assembly has
     spoken out strongly in support of human and civil rights for gays
     and lesbians. We have admitted to membership a number of
     congregations that offer special outreach to gay and lesbian Jews,
     and called upon Reform synagogues to welcome gay and lesbian Jews
     as singles, couples, and families, and not to discriminate on the
     basis of sexual orientation in matters related to employment and
     volunteer leadership. And the UAHC has initiated vigorous education
     programs to heighten awareness of discrimination and to achieve
     fuller acceptance of gay and lesbian Jews in our midst.
     
     The Union, however, has always refrained from addressing the issue
     of rabbinic participation in same gender weddings or commitment
     ceremonies. As a congregational body, it is our task to provide
     guidance on issues of congregational policy that are normally
     decided by synagogue boards. But performance or non-performance of
     a same gender commitment ceremony is a rabbinical matter, to be
     determined by each rabbi according to his or her conscience and
     understanding of Jewish tradition. Therefore, while our synagogue
     members have felt free to present their views to their own rabbis,
     and many have done so vigorously, the Union as an organization has
     appropriately remained silent on the CCAR resolution, and took no
     part in the many months of debate prior to the convention.
     
     But I too am a rabbi, of course, and I was present at Greensboro.
     And I would like you to know that, voting as an individual, I cast
     my ballot in favor the resolution. I did so because of my belief
     that our gay and lesbian children, relatives, and friends are in
     great need of spiritual support; that the Torah's prohibition of
     homosexuality can reasonably be understood as a general
     condemnation of ancient cultic practice; that loving, permanent
     homosexual relationships, once difficult to conceive, are now
     recognized as an indisputable reality; and that in these
     relationships, whether or not we see them as "marriages" it is
     surely true that God and holiness can be present.
     
     I know that many disagree. But whatever one thinks on the
     commitment ceremony question, I assume that we will respect those
     who believe otherwise, and remember what unites us in this debate:
     our responsibility to welcome gays and lesbians into our
     synagogues. Because this I know: if there is anything at all that
     Reform Jews do, it is to create an inclusive spiritual home for all
     those who seek the solace of our sanctuaries. And if this Movement
     does not extend support to all who have been victims of
     discrimination, including gays and lesbians, then we have no right
     to call ourselves Reform Jews.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.9: Reform's Position On...Intermarriage

Answer:
   
   In 1909 the CCAR held that intermarriage (interfaith marriage) is
   ``contrary to the traditions of the Jewish religion.'' The same
   position was restated in 1947, and amplified in 1973, when a
   substantial majority at the CCAR Convention in Atlanta ... declared
   its opposition to participation by its members ``in any ceremony which
   solemnizes a mixed marriage.''
   
   Outgoing UAHC president Alexander Schindler supports the stance
   because of the threat he believes intermarriage poses to the future of
   Judaism."
   
   Most rabbis justify their refusal to officiate at interfaith weddings
   by arguing that the Jewish conception of marriage is that of a
   covenant between two Jews. However, in the United States, there are a
   number of Reform rabbis (one estimate is about one-third) that do
   perform such ceremonies, under the belief that it is better to not
   create an atmosphere of rejection, which can only serve to turn away
   and alienate the Jewish partner. If the Judaism of the Jewish partner
   is strong, the non-Jewish partner is often turned towards Judaism and
   the children are raised Jewish.
   
   Note even if a Reform Rabbi does not perform an intermarriage, they
   will usually accept the marriage as valid, and regard the children of
   those marriages as Jewish as long as they are raised as Jews.
   
   It should be noted that few, if any, Reform/Progressive rabbis will
   perform an intermarriage in either Canada or the United Kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.10: Reform's Position On...Abortion

Answer:
   
   [Based on material in Contemporary American Reform Responsa by Rabbi
   Walter Jacob, publ. by CCAR]:
   
   The Reform Movement has had a long history of liberalism on many
   social and family matters. Reform feels that the pattern of tradition,
   until the most recent generation, has demonstrated a liberal approach
   to abortion and has definitely permitted it in case of any danger to
   the life of the mother. That danger may be physical or psychological.
   When this occurs at any time during the pregnancy, Reform Judaism
   would not hesitate to permit an abortion. This would also include
   cases of incest and rape if the mother wishes to have an abortion.
   
   Twentieth century medicine has brought a greater understanding of the
   fetus, and it is now possible to discover major problems in the fetus
   quite early in the pregnancy. Some genetic defects can be discovered
   shortly after conception and more research will make such techniques
   widely available. It is, of course, equally true that modern medicine
   has presented ways of keeping babies with very serious problems alive,
   frequently in a vegetative state, which brings great misery to the
   family involved. Such problems, as those caused by Tay Sachs and other
   degenerative or permanent conditions which seriously endanger the life
   of the child and potentially the mental health of the mother, are
   indications for permitting an abortion.
   
   Reform Judaism agrees with the traditional authorities that abortions
   should be approached cautiously throughout the life of the fetus. Most
   authorities would be least hesitant during the first forty days of the
   fetus' life (Yeb. 69b; Nid. 30b; M. Ker. 1.1; Shulhan Arukah Hoshen
   Mishpat 210.2; Solomon Skola, Bet Shelomo, Hoshen Mishpat 132; Joseph
   Trani, Responsa Maharit 1.99, Noam 9 pp 213ff, etc.). Even the strict
   Rabbi Unterman permits non-Jews to perform abortions within the forty
   day periods (Rabbi Unterman, op. cit., pp 8ff).
   
   From forty days until twenty-seven weeks, the fetus possesses some
   status, but its future remains doubtful (goses biydei adam; San. 78a;
   Nid 44b and commentaries) as we are not sure of this viability. Reform
   Judaism must, therefore, be more certain of the grounds for abortion,
   but would still permit it.
   
   It is clear from all of this that the traditional authorities would be
   most lenient with abortions within the first forty days. After that
   time, there is a difference of opinion. Those who are within the
   broadest range of permissibility permit abortion at any time before
   birth, if there is serious danger to the health of the mother or
   child. Reform Judaism is in agreement with that liberal stance. Reform
   Judaism does not encourage abortion, nor favor it for trivial reasons,
   or sanction it "on demand".

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.11: Reform's Position On...Mixed (Interfaith)
         Marriages

Answer:
   
   [Adapted from American Reform Responsa, #146]
   
   Reform Judaism and the Central Conference of American Rabbis has
   opposed mixed marriages. Reform Judaism recognizes the problem as
   significant in every period of Jewish history. It has become more
   severe in 20th-century American, and therefore, Reform Judaism has
   made provisions for families of mixed marriages and their children.
   Such families are welcomed in Reform congregations, and Reform Judaism
   continues to urge them to convert to Judaism. The conference
   resolution of 1973 succinctly summarizes the position of Reform
   Judaism:
   
     The Central Conference of American Rabbis, recalling its stand
     adopted in 1909 that "mixed marriage is contrary to the Jewish
     tradition and should be discouraged," now declares its opposition
     to participation by its members in any ceremony which solemnizes a
     mixed marriage.
     
     The Central Conference of American Rabbis recognizes that
     historically its members have held and continue to hold divergent
     interpretations of Jewish tradition. In order to keep open every
     channel to Judaism and K'lal Yisrael for those who ahve already
     entered into mixed marriage, the CCAR calls upon its members:
     
    1. To assist fully in educating children of such mixed marriages as
       Jews
    2. To provide the opportunity for conversion of the non-Jewish
       spouse; and
    3. To encourage a creative and consistent cultivation of involvement
       in the Jewish community and the synagogue.
       
   Most Reform Rabbis will not preform mixed marriages. There are some
   that do, based on the notion that to reject the non-Jewish partner can
   only serve to take the Jewish partner away from Judaism. However, if
   they perform the marriage, the both partners receive a positive
   impression of Judaism, and the option remains of educating the
   non-Jewish partner as to the meaning of Judaism (so that they choose
   to convert on their own). Further, couples with positive feelings
   towards Judaism often raise the children as Jews.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.12: Reform's Position On...The role of women

Answer:
   
   The position of Reform on this issue is best characterized in Rabbi
   Alexander Schindler's letter in the UAHC 1993-1994 Yearbook, in which
   he says:
   
     Our long-standing commitment to openness and diversity is based on
     our tradition. When Moses gathered the elders to help him govern,
     two who were not included nonetheless received God's inspiration
     and "spoke in ecstasy." Although Joshua asked Moses to jail them,
     Moses replied: "Would that all God's people were prophets."
     
     As Reform Jews, we say:
     

     * All God's people--including women.

     * All God's people--including families in all their new
       constellations

     * All God's people--including lesbian and gay Jews

     * All God's people--including the intermarried and the unaffiliated

     * All God's people--including the hearing impaired and the
       wheelchair bound, and the disabled in body and spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.13: Reform's Position On...Outreach

Answer:
   
   Reform Jewish Outreach is a program that aims to:

     * Welcome those who seek to investigate Judaism.

     * Integrate Jews-by-Choice fully into the Jewish community.

     * Encourage intermarried couples to affiliate with a congregation
       and to meet the needs of those already in the congregation.
       Outreach seeks to enable intermarried couples to explore, study,
       and understand Judaism, thereby providing an atmosphere of support
       in which a comfortable relationship with Judaism can be fostered.

     * Educate and sensitize the Jewish community to be receiptive to new
       Jews-by-Choice and intermarried couples.

     * Encourage people to make Jewish choice in their lives through
       special discussion groups, community support, adult education and
       availablity of Jewish resources.

     * Assist young people in strengthening their Jewish identify and in
       examining the implications of interdating and intermarriage for
       themselves.
       
   For those conemplating conversion to Judaism (as well as those
   interested in learning more about Judaism), Outreach offers the
   following:

     * Introduction to Judaism classes on both the community and
       congregational levels. The class focuses on basic Judaism,
       including holidays, life-cycle events, history, theology, and
       Hebrew. Students learn what is means to live a Jewish life and how
       to begin to practice Judaism. The program may include a
       psycho-social component that deals with the personal implications
       of choosing Judaism.

     * Post-introduction programs and various workshops and discussion
       groups.
       
   For intermarried couples and couples contemplating intermarriage,
   Outreach offers the following:

     * An 8-week discussion group designed to clarify the Jewish
       partner's feelings about Judaism and to provide the non-Jewish
       partner with a greater understanding of Judaism and the Jewish
       community. Relevant personal issues discussed include: religious
       involvement while growing up, the religious and cultural
       differences each partner confronts in the relationship with each
       other and with extended family, holiday celebrations, and each
       couple's concerns about the religious upbringing and identity of
       their children.
       Although the program is from a Jewish perspective, there is no
       attempt to convert the non-Jewish partner. The program helps
       participants to articulate the differences between Judaism and
       Christianity.
       
   For Jewish parents of intermarried couples, Outreach offers discussion
   groups to provide parents with a non-judgmental supportive setting
   where they can talk with others with similar concerns. This provides
   the opportunity to discuss the impact of the relationship on the
   family, and to develop constructive responses.
   
   For Jewish youth, Outreach has a number of programs that assist young
   people in examining the implications of interdating and intermarriage
   for themselves as well as for the future of the Jewish people.
   Outreach encourages youth to explore and strengthen their Jewish
   identity so that they will be advocates for Judaism in all their
   relationships.
   
   The ultimate goal of Outreach is to strengthen Judaism by helping
   individuals build their personal connectedness to Reform Judaism.
   
   If you want to find more information about the Outreach program, visit
   Reform Jewish Outreach at http://www.uahcweb.org/outreach/.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.14: Reform's Position On...How an individual's Jewish
         status is determined

Answer:
   
   Reform's position is that the same requirements must be applied to
   establish the status of the child of a mixed (interfaith) marriage,
   regardless of whether the mother or the father is Jewish. Therefore,
   in 1983, the CCAR issued the following resolution:
   
     The Central Conference of American Rabbis declares that the child
     of one Jewish parent is under the presumption of Jewish descent.
     This presumption of the Jewish status of the offspring of any mixed
     marriage is to be established through appropriate and timely public
     and formal acts of identification with the Jewish faith and people.
     The performance of these mitzvot serves to commit those who
     participate in them, both parent and child, to Jewish life.
     
     Depending on circumstances(1), mitzvot leading toward a positive
     and exclusive Jewish identity will include entry into the covenant,
     acquisition of a Hebrew name, Torah study, bar/bat mitzvah, and
     Kabbalat Torah (Confirmation)(2). For those beyond childhood
     claiming Jewish identity, other public acts or declarations may be
     added or substituted after consultation with their rabbi.
     
     (1) According to the age or setting, parents should consult a rabbi
     to determine the specific mitzvot which are necessary.
     
     (2) A full description of these and other mitzvot can be found in
     Shaarei Mitzvah (Gates of Mitzvah), A Guide to the Jewish Life
     Cycle, CCAR, New York, 1979. ISBN 0-916694-37-2.
     
   Note that this decision is sometimes called the "Patrilineal Descent"
   decision, although it does not say that Patrilineal Descent, as
   opposed to the more traditional Matrilineal Descent, is used. Rather,
   it says that a child of an interfaith couple must be raised with a
   continuing and positive association with Judaism to be Jewish.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.3.15: Reform's Position On...The Messiah

Answer:
   
   Although Reform does not believe in the concept of a personal messiah,
   it does believe in the concept of a messianic age.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.1: Fallacy: Reform Jews (RJs) choose practice based
         solely on convenience

Answer:
   
   The 1976 Centenary Statement
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html), adopted in 1976
   stated:
   
     "Judaism emphasizes action rather than creed as the primary
     expression of a religious life, the means by which we strive to
     achieve universal justice and peace. Reform Judaism shares this
     emphasis on duty and obligation. Our founders stressed that the
     Jew's ethical responsibilities, personal and social, are enjoined
     by God. The past century has taught us that the claims made upon us
     may begin with our ethical obligations but they extend to many
     other aspects of Jewish living, including: creating a Jewish home
     centered on family devotion; life-long study; private prayer and
     public worship; daily religious observance; keeping the Sabbath and
     the holy days; celebrating the major events of life; involvement
     with the synagogue and community; and other activities which
     promote the survival of the Jewish people and enhance its
     existence. Within each area of Jewish observance Reform Jews are
     called upon to confront the claims of Jewish tradition, however,
     differently perceived, and to exercise their individual autonomy,
     choosing and creating on the basis of commitment and knowledge."
     
   The 1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html) says:
   
     We are committed to the ongoing study of the whole array of
     (mitzvot) and to the fulfillment of those that address us as
     individuals and as a community [Emph. added by editor]. Some of
     these (mitzvot), sacred obligations, have long been observed by
     Reform Jews; others, both ancient and modern, demand renewed
     attention as the result of the unique context of our own times.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.2: Fallacy: Either patrilineal or matrilineal descent
         is accepted

Answer:
   
   If you examine the Report of the Committee on Patrilineal Descent on
   the Status of Children of Mixed Marriages
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/resodisp.pl?file=mm&year=1983), you
   will see that, for the child of an interfaith marriage, merely having
   a Jewish parent is insufficient to make the child Jewish. Rather, the
   decision states that having only one Jewish parent gives the child a
   "presumption" of Jewish descent. The Jewish status, however, must be
   established through "appropriate and timely public and formal acts of
   identification with the Jewish faith and people."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.3: Fallacy: Reform Conversions take no study, and are
         for convenience only

Answer:
   
   Reform Judaism welcomes all sincere converts without regard to racial
   or national origin or to their former religious faith. In Reform
   Judaism, it is sufficient for the prospective convert (ger) to
   declare, orally and in writing, in the presence of a rabbi and no less
   than two lay leaders of the congregation and community, acceptance of
   the Jewish faith and the intention to live in accordance with its
   mitzvot. This declaration takes place after a preparatory period of
   study. The length of the period of preparation is determined by the
   rabbi, taking into consideration the time needed by the candidate for
   conversion to obtain the necessary understanding and appreciation of
   Judaism in order to make a free-will decision with respect to his/her
   acceptance of the Jewish faith and identification with the Jewish
   people.
   
   Reform recommends that the period of study be reinforced by requiring
   and assisting the prospective convert's active participation in the
   various celebrations, observances, and worship services of Judaism and
   the Jewish people. It recommends that regular attendance at synagogue
   worship, as well as evidence of concern for Jewish values and causes
   in the home and community, should be required. The intent of this is
   to enable the rabbi and his/her associates to satisfy themselves not
   only that the candidate has a sufficient knowledge of Judaism, but of
   even greater importance, that the candidate is a person of sincere and
   responsible character, who is genuinely desirous of making a
   wholehearted commitment to synagogue affiliation and to the Jewish
   faith and people.
   
   Note that the above items (study, attendance at services) are only
   recommendations. While the authors of the Reform teshuva affirm that
   such items should theoretically be considered a necessity, this is not
   necessary in practice if one claims to already have been living a
   Jewish life. The Reform rabbinate may presume that if such a claim is
   made, then the person doesn't need such a course.
   
   Reform does not require male converts to undergo b'rit milah
   (circumcision) or hatafat dam b'rit (the drawing of blood); nor does
   it require converts to have tevilah (ritual immersion). However, it
   recognizes that there are social, psychological, and religious values
   associated with these rituals, and it recommends that the rabbi
   acquaint prospective gerim with the halachic background and rationale
   for b'rit milah, hatafat dam b'rit, and tevilah, and offer them the
   opportunity, if they so desire, to observe these additional rites. In
   the UK, the ULPS requires circumcision for male converts, but does
   accept a pre-existing medical circumcision.
   
   Reform does not require kabbalaot al mitvot (accepting Jewish law as
   normative), especially as "Jewish law" is interpreted by the
   traditional communities. Reform does require an understanding of the
   ten commandments, the ethical mitvot, and a general understanding of
   other Jewish religious obligations.
   
   Note that, outside of the US, procedures may be even stricter. For
   example, in Vancouver CANADA, students study for a year before being
   considered for conversion. Converts undergo the mikvah, in the
   presence of three (3) rabbis. Men are required to to be circumsized,
   and are also required to undergo the ritual circumcision (letting of
   the blood).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.4: Fallacy: Reform Judaism encourages intermarriage

Answer:
   
   Reform Judaism and the Central Conference of American Rabbis has
   repeatedly opposed mixed (interfaith) marriages. However, it does not
   feel that once the marriage has occurred, the couple should be
   shunned, for this serves only to drive them further away from Judaism.
   This is best illustrated by a resolution
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/resodisp.pl?file=mm&year=1973) issued
   in 1973 by the CCAR:
   
     The Central Conference of American Rabbis, recalling its stand
     adopted in 1909 that mixed marriage is contrary to the Jewish
     tradition and should be discouraged, now declared its opposition to
     participation by its members in any ceremony which solemnizes a
     mixed marriage.
     
     The Central Conference of American Rabbis recognizes that
     historically its members have held and continue to hold divergent
     interpretations of Jewish tradition.
     
     In order to keep open every channel to Judaism and K'lal Yisrael
     for those who have already entered into mixed marriage, the CCAR
     calls upon its members:
    1. to assist fully in educating children of such mixed marriage as
       Jews;
    2. to provide the opportunity for conversion of the non-Jewish
       spouse, and
    3. to encourage a creative and consistent cultivation of involvement
       in the Jewish community and the synagogue.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.5: Fallacy: Intermarried couples have exactly the same
         rights as non-intermarried couples in Reform Congregations

Answer:
   
   Although congregational policies may differ by congregation, there are
   a number of Reform responses that address this question:

     * In American Reform Responsa #10 (1982)
       [http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/respdisp.pl?file=10&year=arr], it
       is asked if congregational membership can be extended to the
       non-Jewish member of an interfaith marriage. The conclusion of
       that responsa is that it should not; only the Jewish member should
       be considered a member for purposes of being a congregational
       leader, for it is inappropriate for non-Jews to lead the
       congregation.
       Some Reform congregations include non-Jewish spouses in family
       memberships (i.e., the non-Jewish spouse may be a member if the
       Jewish spouse is a member). Some congregations, as part of the
       overall autonomy of Reform, do permit the non-Jewish spouse to
       participate in some rituals. Most congregations reserve some
       religious roles for only Jewish members, and most congregations
       reserve the leadership roles, such as election to the board of
       trustees, or the holding of other offices for the member who is
       Jewish.

     * A 1979 Responsa
       (http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/respdisp.pl?file=6&year=arr) says:
       
     From Babylonian times onward, public prayers for rulers of the
     country, parallel to those for scholars and students in the
     academies, were included in the liturgy and have remained there
     ever since. These rulers, of course, were pagans, Moslems, or
     Christians. We, in modern times, have gone a number of steps
     further than this. For example, we regularly recite the names of
     non-Jewish dead in the lists of deceased read before the Kaddish.
     In most cases, these are relatives of converts; although the
     convert is not duty-bound to mourn for his parents, he should be
     encouraged to do so out of respect (Yad, Hil. Evel 2.3; Radbaz to
     Yad; Sh.A., Y.D. 374.5; and many subsequent authorities). We have,
     however, also added the names of notable Christians from time to
     time. In addition, we have participated frequently in interfaith
     services, which have generally been associated with national
     holidays or events; these have usually been non-liturgical in
     character, i.e., consisted of Biblical readings and various prayers
     without following the strict order of the service. Furthermore, we
     have invited non-Jews, including ministers and priests, to address
     our congregations during our public services. This practice has
     been widespread in the Reform and Conservative movements. Thus,
     there is no doubt that we have included priests, ministers, and
     non-Jewish participants in our services in a manner not known
     heretofore. In addition, nowadays, because of intermarriage we find
     the non-Jewish parent involved in a Bar/Bat Mitzvah. It would be
     appropriate to have that parent participate in some way in the
     service, but not in the same way as a Jewish parent. For example,
     he or she should not recite the traditional blessing over the Torah
     which includes the words "asher bachar banu." It would be well if
     he/she recite a special blessing, perhaps akin to the words
     suggested by Solomon B. Freehof: "Praised be Thou, Lord our God,
     King of the Universe, Who has given His sacred law unto all His
     children that we may learn, observe, and serve Him in
     righteousness" (Current Reform Responsa, p. 91).
     We have, therefore, gone much further than any generation before
     our time by permitting non-Jews a larger role in our public
     services; this is part of a more open and friendly interreligious
     attitude which the Reform Movement has encouraged and led. Yet,
     these steps have remained within definite limits. We have not
     included non-Jews, no matter how friendly, in the essential
     elements of the service. If we follow the line of reasoning which
     divides between the essential service and supplemental prayers and
     statements, we may conclude that Christians, Moslems, and other
     non-Jews who fall into the category of Benei Noach may participate
     in a public service in any of the following ways: (1) through
     anything which does not require specific statement from them, i.e.,
     by standing and silently witnessing whatever is taking place (e.g.,
     as a member of a wedding party or as a pallbearer); (2) through the
     recitation of special prayers added to the service at
     non-liturgical community wide services, commemorations, and
     celebrations (Thanksgiving, etc.); (3) through the recitation of
     prayers for special family occasions (Bar/Bat Mitzvah of children
     raised as Jews, at a wedding or funeral, etc.). All such prayers
     and statements should reflect the mood of the service and be
     non-Christological in nature.
       
   In many Reform congregations, intermarried couples now have more or
   less the same rights as non-intermarried couples in terms of
   congregational membership. The key element is "couples"; membership is
   based on the family unit, not the individual. Often, the non-Jewish
   partner serves on temple committees, but usually those committees do
   not include those related to religious practice and ritual (for
   example, a finance or employment practices committee). A survery
   conducted by the Commission on Reform Jewish Outreach shows that 88%
   of Reform Temples allow gentiles to count as Reform Jews by being
   synagogue members if they are married to Reform Jews; 87% of Reform
   Temples allow gentiles to serve on synagogue committees, but only 22%
   of Reform Temples allow gentiles to have an aliyah to the Torah.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.6: Fallacy: Reform Judaism has Rabbis and
         congregations that don't believe in God

Answer:
   
   Individual beliefs of Rabbis and congregations are personal, and not
   subject to scrutiny by the movement. However, there has been a case
   where a congregation was refused membership in UAHC because they
   removed all references to God from their liturgy, and refused to allow
   prayers mentioning God to be said in their santuary.
   
   Note that there are rabbis and laypeople in all of the Jewish
   denominations who go through a crisis of faith, have uncertainties
   about the nature of God, or who are agnostic or atheist. Faith can not
   be forced. An atheist or agnostic is not someone who thinks "There
   really is a God, but I shall not admit it". Rather an atheist or
   agnostic is someone who thinks "I see no evidence for God's existence,
   and am certain (or fairly sure) that God does not exist." By
   definition, one can never force someone to change their beliefs; that
   can only come about from something internal to that person.
   
   Does Judaism demand that such a person be considered as if they are in
   contempt of Judaism? No. They are only held accountable for their
   actions, for while beliefs are not a matter of choice, actions are.
   The Talmud of the Land of Israel (Talmud Yerushalmi) posits that God
   says about them "Would they were to forsake Me, providing that they
   keep My law, for as a result of occupying themselves with it, its
   light will bring them back to the right path" (Tractate Hagigah 1:7,
   76c).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.7: Fallacy: There are no 3rd or 4th generation Reform
         Jews

Answer:
   
   Certainly, assimilation has been a problem for Judaism. Reform Judaism
   is especially subject to that problem because many assimilated
   Americans who want to identify as Jews, choose a Reform synagogue, not
   because they are Reform Jews, but because the Reform temple is the
   least judgmental of their assimilated practices (or in some cases,
   non-practices).
   
   Many of the children of these families do not remain Jewish, but in
   fact assimilation was already a generation old.
   
   To actually be a 3rd or 4th generation Reform Jew would require that
   one's ancestors, living in the 1800s, be Reform Jews. The major growth
   of Reform Judaism has been in the 20th century. So while it is true
   there are few 3rd or 4th generation Reform Jews numerically, they are
   not a large number primarily due to the heavy immegration in the early
   1900s. The majority of today's Reform Jews have ancestors who were O
   or C, but primarily because there was a limited pool of R on whom to
   draw. Yet there are 3rd, 4th, and even 5th generation Reform Jews
   (just look at the FAQ Maintainer's daughter).
   
   There is a different question, however: For those that were Reform in
   the 1800s, how many of their children are still Jewish, and still
   Reform, today. Anecdotal evidence suggests that number is large.
   
   Note that Reform has invented and reinvented itself (and will
   undoubtedly continue to do so) in response to a changing world. By the
   1930s, it became clear that "classical Reform" wasn't speaking to the
   majority of RJs. As a result, the evolutionary changes that began in
   the 20s were formalized with the "Columbus Platform"
   (http://ccarnet.org/platforms/columbus.html) of the 30's that led to
   Traditional (or Modern) Reform.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.8: Fallacy: An atheist could be considered a "good"
         Reform Jew

Answer:
   
   A person's individual beliefs with respect to God are personal, and
   are not inspected by Reform. Even in traditional Judaism, there have
   been times when the greatest Jewish thinkers have questioned the
   existance of God. Judaism, in general, does not question one's belief;
   rather, it looks at one's adherance to the yoke of Mitzvah, as
   interpreted by the appropriate movement.
   
   However, the position of Reform with respect to Atheism is shown in
   its policy relating to accepting atheists for conversion. A responsa
   in Jewish Year 5754
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/cgi-bin/respdisp.pl?file=15&year=5754) stated:
   
     The important qualifying phrase is commitment to this religion.
     Reform Judaism is a religious movement, a community of faith
     dedicated to God. A ger must show a readiness to accept that faith
     in order to join our community. [...]
     
     [...]for Reform Judaism, a prospective convert had both to embrace
     the Jewish people and make a solemn declaration of faith in God,
     the God of our ancestors, as the one and only God. While many
     rabbis then and now insist on certain rituals and other obligations
     as incumbent upon the prospective convert (e.g. immersion,
     circumcision, a course of study, examinations, etc.), the sine qua
     non of conversion for Reform Judaism, as it is for all branches of
     Judaism, has always been faith in God. The centrality of God in the
     Reform conversion ceremony is verified by examination of the
     succession of rabbinic manuals published by the CCAR.
     
                                   [...]
                                      
     Some contend that since we find among the members of Reform
     congregations certain Jews who are avowed atheists or agnostics, we
     should not hesitate to accept a convert who falls into either
     category. It is true that some Jews experience crises of faith. We
     acknowledge the reality of the spiritual journey and struggle our
     brothers and sisters endure, and they remain part of us as long as
     they do not abandon our people or join another religion. However,
     that flexibility is reserved for those who are already "citizens,"
     who already belong. It is the nature of the conversion process that
     the convert must meet standards which, in practice, are not
     demanded of the already-Jewish: a program of Jewish study, required
     synagogue attendance, participation in synagogue and communal
     activities, and the like.
     
                                   [...]
                                      
     Reform Judaism is a religious movement of Jews dedicated to the
     covenant between God and the Jewish people. If we do not insist
     that the ger meet this fundamental standard and find herself ready
     to affirm the reality of God in Jewish religious life and
     experience, it would be a legitimate question whether we have any
     standards at all.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.9: Fallacy: Reform Jews don't have Bar Mitzvahs

Answer:
   
   They don't? Tell that to the person trying to schedule the social
   hall. Although Bar/Bat Mitzvah was originally rejected by the Reform
   movement, it has returned with a vengeance, with many congreagations
   having three or more Bar/Bat Mitzvah's per Shabbat.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.10: Fallacy: Reform totally ignores "Jewish" divorce
         (i.e., gets)

Answer:
   
   The Central Conference of American Rabbis makes no provision for a
   religious divorce, and civil divorce is recognized as dissolving a
   marriage by most Reform Rabbis. Note that even if Reform were to
   introduce its own get, it would likely not be recognized by
   traditional Judaism as valid. However, many Reform Rabbis, if asked,
   would advise the couple regarding obtaining a get, and would likely
   direct them to the appropriate community organizations that could help
   them.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.11: Fallacy: All Reform Congregations Are Rich

Answer:
   
   Reform congregations vary in size from a two member congregation in
   Port Gibson MS and a 3 member congregation in Laredo TX, to
   congregations with almost 2,000 members. Some have grandiose
   buildings; some meet in houses or rent space from organizations. Some
   have volunteer rabbis and volunteer staff, others have generous staff
   and rabbinic salaries. There is no universal characterization
   possible.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.12: Fallacy: Reform Rabbis do not study Halacha

Answer:
   
   If you look at the course of study for the Reform Rabbinate, it does
   include Torah, Talmud, and other aspects of halacha. Of course, the
   depth of this study is not to the level of traditional Judaism,
   although some Reform Rabbis out of personal interest do intensive
   halachic studies.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.13: Fallacy: Reform Jews don't care about Jewish
         ideals & principles

Answer:
   
   As was noted in the Centenary Perspective
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html) in 1976, "the claims
   made upon [Reform Jews] may begin with our ethical obligations but
   they extend to many other aspects of Jewish living, including:
   creating a Jewish home centered on family devotion; life-long study;
   private prayer and public worship; daily religious observance; keeping
   the Sabbath and the holy days; celebrating the major events of life;
   involvement with the synagogue and community; and other activities
   which promote the survival of the Jewish people and enhance its
   existence."
   
   This is echoed in the 1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html), which says:

     * We are called by Torah to lifelong study in the home, in the
       synagogue and in every place where Jews gather to learn and teach.
       Through Torah study we are called to (mitzvot), the means by which
       we make our lives holy.

     * We are committed to the ongoing study of the whole array of
       (mitzvot) and to the fulfillment of those that address us as
       individuals and as a community. Some of these (mitzvot), sacred
       obligations, have long been observed by Reform Jews; others, both
       ancient and modern, demand renewed attention as the result of the
       unique context of our own times.

     * We bring Torah into the world when we seek to sanctify the times
       and places of our lives through regular home and congregational
       observance. Shabbat calls us to bring the highest moral values to
       our daily labor and to culminate the workweek with (kedushah),
       holiness, (menuchah), rest and (oneg), joy. The High Holy Days
       call us to account for our deeds. The Festivals enable us to
       celebrate with joy our people's religious journey in the context
       of the changing seasons. The days of remembrance remind us of the
       tragedies and the triumphs that have shaped our people's
       historical experience both in ancient and modern times. And we
       mark the milestones of our personal journeys with traditional and
       creative rites that reveal the holiness in each stage of life.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.14: Fallacy: Reform Jews don't need to attend
         synagogue

Answer:
   
   As was noted in the Centenary Perspective
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/centenary.html) in 1976, the
   obligations of Reform Jews include "public worship; ...; involvement
   with the synagogue and community..."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.15: Fallacy: Reform Jews don't believe in Zionism and
         don't support Israel

Answer:
   
   This couldn't be further from the truth. Reform Judaism has its own
   Zionist organization, ARZA/World Union, and is working strongly to
   support religious pluralism for all Jewish movements in Israel.
   Although Classical Reform was opposed to Zionism, modern Reform is
   very strong in its support of the State of Israel. This is made clear
   in the 1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html), which says:

     * We are committed to (Medinat Yisrael), the State of Israel, and
       rejoice in its accomplishments. We affirm the unique qualities of
       living in (Eretz Yisrael), the land of Israel, and encourage
       (aliyah), immigration to Israel.

     * We are committed to a vision of the State of Israel that promotes
       full civil, human and religious rights for all its inhabitants and
       that strives for a lasting peace between Israel and its neighbors.

     * We are committed to promoting and strengthening Progressive
       Judaism in Israel, which will enrich the spiritual life of the
       Jewish state and its people.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.16: Fallacy: Reform Jews have no concept of the
         Messiah

Answer:
   
   Although Reform does not hold with the concept of a personal messiah,
   it does hold with the concept of a messianic age.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.17: Fallacy: Reform Jews do not observe Shabbat

Answer:
   
   Gates of the Seasons, the American Reform Movement's guide to the
   Jewish Year, views Shabbat as a unique Jewish contribution to
   civilization, and a central activity to surviving the forces of
   assimilation and corruption. As such, it calls out the following
   mitzvot for Reform Jews:
   
   A-1
          The Mitzvah of Shabbat Observance
          
          It is a mitzvah for every Jew, single or married, young or old,
          to observe Shabbat. The unique status of Shabbat is
          demonstrated by its being the only one of the holy days to be
          mentioned in the Ten Commandments. ... Shabbat observance
          involves both positive and negative mitzvot, i.e., doing and
          refraining from doing.
          
   A-2
          The Mitzvah of Joy 
          
          IT is a mitzvah to take delight in Shabbat observance, as
          Isaiah said, "You shall call Shabbat a deligh". Oneg implies
          celebration and relaxation, sharing time with loved ones,
          enjoying the beauty of nature, eating a leisurely meal made
          special with conviviality and song, visiting with friends and
          relatives, taking a leisurely stroll, reading, and listening to
          music.
          
   A-3
          The Mitzvah of Sanctification 
          
          It is a mitzvah to hallow Shabbat by setting it apart from the
          other days of the week. ... Shabbat must be distinguished from
          the other days of the week so that those who observe it may be
          transformed by its holiness.
          
   A-4
          The Mitzvah of Rest 
          
          It is a mitzvah to rest on Shabbat. However, Shabbat rest
          (menuchah) implies much more than refraining from work. The
          concept of Shabbat rest includes both physical relaxation and
          tranquility of mind and spirit. On Shabbat, one deliverately
          turns away from weekday pressures and activities.
          
   A-5
          The Mitzvah of refraining from work
          
          It is a mitzvah to refrain from work on Shabbat...Abstinence
          from work is a major expression of Shabbat observance; however,
          it is no simple matter to define work today. Certain activities
          that some do to earn a living, others do for relaxation or to
          express their creativity. Clearly, though, one should avoid
          one's normal occupation or profession on Shabbat whenever
          possible and engage only in those types of activities that
          enhance the joy, rest, and holiness of the day.
          
   See Gates of the Seasons for additional details. Note support for
   Shabbat is also in the 1999 Statement of Principles
   (http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/principles.html), which says:
   
     We bring Torah into the world when we seek to sanctify the times
     and places of our lives through regular home and congregational
     observance. Shabbat calls us to bring the highest moral values to
     our daily labor and to culminate the workweek with (kedushah),
     holiness, (menuchah), rest and (oneg), joy.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.18: Fallacy: Reform Jews ignore the laws of Kashrut

Answer:
   
   [The following is based on Kashrut: A Reform Point of View in Gates of
   Mitzvah]
   
   Gates of Mitzvah, a guide to mitzvot in a Reform context, states
   regarding Kashrut:
   
     Many Reform Jews observe certain traditional disciplines as part of
     their attempt to establish a Jewish home and life style. For some,
     traditional Kashrut will enhance the sanctity of the home and be
     observed as a mitzvah; for some, a degreee of kashrut (e.g., the
     avoidance of pork products and/or shellfish) may be meaningful; and
     sill others may find nothing of value in kashrut. However, the fact
     that kashrut was an essential feature of Jewish life for som any
     centuries should motivate the Jewish family to study it and to
     consider whether or not it may enhance the sanctity of their home.
     
   The basic Reform philosophy is that it is a Reform Jew's
   responsibility to study and consider kashrut so as to develop a valid
   personal position. For although "classic" Reform Judaism did reject
   kashrut (as noted in the Pittsburgh Platform of 1885,
   http://www.ccarnet.org/platforms/pittsburgh.html), it did not prevent
   Reform Jews and Reform congregations from adopting and observing the
   dietary laws. The reasons for observing the laws by Reform Jews
   varied, from a desire to allow a wide variety of Jews to share in
   celebrations, to deeper meanings.
   
   In attempting to evolve a position on Kashrut, a Reform Jew has
   several options, for example, abstention from pork/shellfish products,
   not mixing meat and milk, etc. They might observe the laws at home,
   but not when eating out, or they might observe them all the time. They
   might eat only Kosher meat, or might become vegetarians in consonance
   with the principle of tzaar baalei chayim--prevention of pain or
   cruelty to animals. The range of options is from full observance to
   total nonobservance.
   
   The Torah commands Jews to observe the dietary laws as a means of
   making it kadosh--holy. Holiness has the dual sense of inner hallowing
   and outer separateness. There are many reasons that Reform Jews adopt
   some form of Kashrut:
    1. Identification and solidarity with worldwide Judaism
    2. The ethical discipline of avoiding certain foods or limiting one's
       appetite because of the growing scarcity of food in parts of the
       world.
    3. The avoidance of certain foods traditionally obnoxious to Jews,
       providing a sense of identification with past generations and
       their struggle to remain Jews.
    4. The authority of ancient biblical and rabbinic injunctions.
    5. The desire to have a home in which any Jew can eat.
       
   One or more of these reasons (or perhaps another reason) might lead a
   Reform Jew to adopt some form of Kashrut. Others might still choose to
   not observe Kashrut. But given the central nature of Kashrut to
   traditional practice, Reform Jews are encouraged to study it and
   consider carefully whether it would add kedushah, sanctity, to their
   home and their lives.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.4.19: Fallacy: Reform rejects most of Maimonides 13
         Principles of Faith

Answer:
   
   A common claim is the Reform rejects most of Maimonides 13 Principles
   of Faith. The real answer is: "It depends how you look at it". In some
   interpretations, Reform accepts many of the articles. In other
   interpretations, Reform does not. Part of this is due to the freedom
   of belief and practice that characterizes Reform Judaism.
   
   In examining this question, it is worth exploring why the question is
   relevant at all. According to "The Jewish Encylopedia", Judaism cannot
   be said to possess "Articles of Faith", as is found in Christianity or
   Islam. The encylopedia notes that: Many attempts have indeed been made
   at systematizing and reducing to a fixed phraseology and sequence the
   contents of the Jewish religion. But these have always lacked the one
   essential element: authoritative sanction on the part of a supreme
   ecclesiastical body. And for this reason they have not been recognized
   as final or regarded as of universally binding force. Though to a
   certain extent incorporated in the liturgy and utilized for purposes
   of instruction, these formulations of the cardinal tenets of Judaism
   carried no greater weight than that imparted to them by the fame and
   scholarship of their respective authors.
   
   Acceptance of Maimonides's Thirteen Principles of Faith is not
   required by halakha, and in fact prominent Jewish authorities both
   before and after Maimonides have offered a number of different
   formulations of the principles of Jewish faith. The successors of
   Maimonides, from the thirteenth to the fifteeneth century--Nahmanides
   , Abba Mari ben Moses, Simon ben Zemah, Du ran, Isaac Arama, and
   Joseph Jaabez--reduced his thirteen articles to three: Belief in God;
   Creation (or revelation); and in providence/retribution.
   
   Others, like Crescas and David ben Samuel Estella, spoke of seven
   fundmental articles, laying stress on free-will. David ben Yom-Tob ibn
   Bilia, in his "Yesodot ha- Maskil" (Fundamentals of the Thinking Man),
   adds to the thirteen of Maimonides thirteen of his own. Yedaiah
   Penini, in the last chapter of his "Behinat ha-Dat," enumerated no
   less than thirty-five cardinal principles.
   
   In the fourteenth century Asher ben Jehiel of Toledo raised his voice
   against the Maimonidean Articles of Faith, declaring them to be only
   temporary, and suggested that another be added to recognize that the
   Exile is a punishment for the sins of Israel. Isaac Abravanel, his
   "Rosh Amanah," took the same attitude towards Maimonides' creed. While
   defending Maimonides against Hasdai and Albo, he refused to accept
   dogmatic articles for Judaism, holding, with all the cabalists, that
   the 613 commandments of the Law are all tantamount to Articles of
   Faith.
   
   However, note that while no one formulation of a creed is accepted by
   all, certain elements of faith are accepted by all traditional sources
   and considered binding by traditional movements: the existence of one
   God, divine revelation of Torah on Sinai and others.
   
   That said, here is one interpretation of how Reform addresses the
   "Articles of Faith":
   
    1. God exists and the existance transcends time. 
       Reform agrees with this. The 1999 Statement of Principles says:
       "We affirm the reality and oneness of God, even as we may differ
       in our understanding of the Divine presence."
    2. God is one and there is nothing like God.
       Reform agrees with this. As the previous quote from the statement
       of principles said: "We affirm the ...oneness of God".
    3. God has no semblance and is bodiless. 
       Reform does not dictate a form for God, noting (as in the previous
       quote from the Statement of Principles): "[We] may differ in our
       understanding of the Divine presence." For almost all Reform Jews,
       God is treated as without semblance or body.
    4. The existance of God preceeded creation. 
       Reform doctrine does not contradict this statement.
    5. God is eternal and prayer should be directed to God 
       Reform agrees with this. The fact that prayer should be directed
       to God is captured in the 1999 Statement of Principles in the line
       "We respond to God daily: through public and private prayer...".
       The statement makes no statements, but does not contradict, the
       eternal nature of God. It does state: "We trust in our tradition's
       promise that, although God created us as finite beings, the spirit
       within us is eternal."
    6. God communicated with prophets 
       Reform agrees with this, as it holds with divine inspiration.
    7. The prophecy of Moses was true, and that he was the chief of all
       prophets, both those before him and those after him. 
       Reform agrees (in some sense) with the first clause, but has
       replaced the second clause ("chief of all the prophets") with the
       theory of Progressive Revelation. For Reform Jews, the prophecy of
       Moses was not the highest degree of prophecy; rather his was the
       first in a long chain of progressive revelations in which mankind
       gradually began to understand the will of God better and better.
       As such, the laws of Moses are held as strongly binding as they
       are in traditional movements, and it is today's generation that
       must assess what God wants of them. This view has been affirmed
       from classic Reform to the present (Gunther Plaut, Eugene
       Borowitz, Walter Jacobs, etc.)
    8. The entire Torah now in our hands is the same one that was given
       to Moses. 
       Whereas traditional Jews view the Written Torah as the same that
       Moses taught, for practical purposes, plus or minus scribal
       errors, Reform (as well as Conservative and Reconstructionist
       Jews) take a different approach. These liberal movements accept
       the results of biblical scholarship, and archeological and
       linguistic research. They accept that the core of the Torah may
       indeed have come from Moses, but that the document that we have to
       today has been edited together from several documents, and assumed
       the final form that we know in the time of Ezra (about 440 BCE).
    9. God will never change Torah. 
       Reform actually agrees with this. However, Reform believes that
       what was written was expressed in the language/context of its
       time, and must be reinterpretated for the language/context of
       today. Hence, Torah doesn't change, but our interpretation and
       understanding of it does. This is captured in the 1999 Statement
       of Principles in the line: "We cherish the truths revealed in
       Torah, God's ongoing revelation to our people and the record of
       our people's ongoing relationship with God."
   10. God knows humanity's thoughts and deeds 
       Reform's High Holy Day liturgies retain these concepts. In the
       past, Reform has removed from the liturgy those concepts that are
       incompatible with Reform (such as the nature of the Messiah).
       Hence, this concept remains compatible with Reform.
   11. God rewards and punishes 
       Reform's High Holy Day liturgies retain these concepts, leading to
       the conclusion that this concept remains compatible with Reform.
   12. God will send a messiah. 
       Reform holds with a concept of a messianic age, as opposed to an
       individual. The traditional messianic notion is not part of
       Reform.
   13. God will revive the dead. 
       In the literalist interpretation, this is not a Reform belief.
       However, Reform does hold with alternate approaches to fulfilling
       the underlying prophesies.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.5.1: Traditional Judaism Differences: Why does Reform
         liturgy say "m'chayey hakol" [who gives life to all] instead of
         m'chayey meytim" [who gives life to the dead] ?

Answer:
   
   There are individual Reform Jews who believe in resurrection "m'chayey
   meytim". However, the Reform movement does not have any creed which
   would require such a belief. By changing m'chayey meytim to the more
   generic m'chayey ha-kol, the prayer becomes equivocal. This allows the
   believer in resurrection to understand the prayer as resurrection
   while allowing those with the more conventional Reform belief to
   relate to the prayer with intellectual integrity.
   
   Note that, in the United Kingdom, the Union of Liberal and Progressive
   Synagogues has produced a new prayerbook, Siddur Lev Chadash. This
   prayerbook has reverted to Mechayeh hamaytim. Rabbi Andrew Goldstein,
   who was on the editorial committee, tried to explain it as a new
   understanding of the Amidah prayer as covering all life, including
   death, and the reintroduction as a way of reverting to a tradition,
   having spent many years disassociating it from its traditional
   feelings of a prayer for the dead.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.5.2: Traditional Judaism Differences: What other changes
         to liturgy reflect Reform ideals?

Answer:
   
   The Reform Movement has repeatedly revised the traditional liturgy, in
   order to shorten the service by dispensing with some of the
   repetitions (for example, there is only one reader's Kaddish), and to
   bring the doctrinal content of the liturgy into accord with Reform
   thought by omitting or recasting passages expressive of beliefs that
   are not part of Reform (e.g., a personal Messiah as distinct from a
   messianic age, ressurection of the dead, restoration of the
   sacrificial cult, and the existance of angels).
   
   As an example of this, consider the Shema and Tefillah. Traditionally,
   the Shema consists of three Scriptural passages: Deut. 6.4-9, Deut.
   11.13-21, and Num. 15:37-41. In Reform siddurs, the second paragraph
   is often omitted because of the doctrine of retribution, and the third
   because of the commandment regarding fringes. Reform does include Num.
   15.40f. With respect to the Tefillah, there are more significant
   changes. The Tefillah traditionally consists of 18 benedictions, to
   which, perhaps in the 2nd or 3rd century CE, a 19th was added. It can
   be broken into three parts: the first three benedictions, an
   intermediate thirteen benedictions, and a final three benedictions.
   These are traditionally said three times daily, and appear (in a
   modified form) in the weekday service in the Reform siddur (although
   most Reform congregations do not hold weekday services, there are
   congregations and study groups that do, and hence, a service is
   provided for them). On Shabbat and on festivals, only the first three
   and the last three are said; the intermediate benedictions are
   replaced by ones peculiar to the appropriate day.
   
    First Grouping:
    
   1.
          The first benediction, Ancestors/Avot, is retained mostly
          unchanged, except for referring to our fathers and our mothers.
          Most Reform siddurs change the text to read "redemption"
          instead of "a redeemer.". A recent trend has been to include
          Sarah, Leah, Rachel, and Rebecca in addition to Abraham, Isaac,
          and Jacob. This goes with the egalitarian nature of Reform.
          
   2.
          The second benediction, Powers/Gevurot, is amended to affirm
          that God is the source of all life, and that God has implanted
          within us eternal life. Traditionally, the main theme of this
          benediction was resurrection of the dead, a doctrine not
          accepted by Reform Judaism. These words were expressed in the
          traditional siddur as "...and revivest the dead with great
          mercy..". In the Reform prayerbook, this is changed to "...with
          great compassion give life to all."
          
   3.
          The third benediction, Holiness of God/Kedushat Hashem, has
          also been changed slightly. The Hebrew that might more
          literally be rendered as "holy beings" (angels) has been
          changed to "those who strive to be holy".
          
    Intermediate Benedictions:
    
   1-4.
          The first (Understanding/Binah), second (Repentence/Teshuvah),
          third (Forgiveness/Selichah), and fourth (Redemption/Ge-u-lah)
          of the thirteen intermediate benedictions are retained,
          although they are rendered in a gender-neutral language (that
          is, God is referred to as a Soverign or a Ruler, as contrasted
          to a Father or a King).
          
   5.
          The fifth intermediate benediction, Healing/Refuah, is changed
          slightly. The traditional "who heals the sick of His people
          Israel" is changed to "Healer of the sick", a potentially older
          version found in J. Ber. 2.4 and Sifrei to Deut. 33.2. The
          change was made because the older version is more
          comprehensive.
          
   6.
          The sixth intermediate benediction, Blessing of the Years
          (Abundance)/Birkat Hashanim, is also changed slightly: one
          phrase ("Bless our year like other years") is omitted.
          
   7.
          The seventh intermediate benediction, Ingathering of the
          Exiles/Kibbuts Galuyot, is rewritten. The Reform version begins
          the same way as the traditional text, but in place of the
          petition for the ingathering of the exiles goes on to emphasize
          the hope for universal freedom. Thus, "...bring our exiles
          together and assemble us from the four courners of the
          earth..." becomes "...inspire us to strive for the liberation
          of the oppressed, and let the song of liberty be heard in the
          four corners of the earth..."
          
   8.
          The eight intermediate benediction, Justice/Birkat Mishpat, is
          also rewritten. The first half, which traditionally voices the
          hope for the restoration of Israel's judges, is reworded to
          express the hope for universal justice (based on passages such
          as Isa 40.23; Ps. 148.11; Joel 3.1; Zech 12.10, and so on). The
          second half is almost identical with the traditional.
          
   9.
          The ninth intermediate benediction, a malediction against
          slanderers or informers (originally heretics), is omitted.
          
   10.
          The tenth (traditional, ninth in Reform) intermediate
          benediction, Blessing for the Righteous/Birkat Hatsadikim, is
          abridged (i.e., "...upon the righteous and faithful of all
          peoples, and upon all of us.")
          
   11.
          The eleventh (traditional, tenth in Reform) intermediate
          benediction, Builder of Jerusalem/Bonei Yerushalayim, is
          rewritten. Traditionally, this benediction beseeches God to
          rebuild Jerusalem and to reestablish the Davidic monarchy.
          Partly for doctrinal reasons, and partly because the
          traditional theme is repeated by the subsequent benediction,
          the Reform version is altered to be a prayer for the present
          and continuing welfare of the land and people of Israel. The
          Reform version also contains an allusion to the connection
          between Zion and the messianic hope, expressed by a reference
          to Zion and Jerusalem as the source of enlightenment to all
          humanity.
          
   12.
          The twelfth (traditional, eleventh in Reform) intermediate
          benediction, Blessing concerning David, Birkat David, is also
          rewritten. In the Reform version, the hope for restoration of
          the Davidic commonwealth is broadened into a concept of a
          Messianic Age.
          
   13.
          The thirteenth (traditional, twelfth in Reform) intermediate
          benediction, Who Harkens to Prayer/Shomei-a Tefillah, is
          abridged.
          
    Final three benedictions:
    
   1.
          The first of the last three benedictions, Worship/Avodah, is
          modified. The traditional references to sacrificial worship are
          omitted; instead, a throught on the theme of God's nearness to
          all who seek God with sincerity is used.
          
   2.
          The second of the last three benedictions,
          Thanksgiving/Hoda-ah, uses the complete text, but is rendered
          in a gender-neutral fashion.
          
   3.
          The last of the three benedictions, the Priestly
          Benediction/Birkat Kohanim, is retained relatively unchanged
          from the traditional version, although some of the translations
          are more freely done.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.5.3: Traditional Judaism Differences: Why does Reform
         generally celebrate Rosh Hashanah for one day?

Answer:
   
   In North America, some Reform congregations do observe two days; but
   the general trend is to only observe one. Two days was the custom in
   the diaspora, where it was difficult to determine with accuracy the
   first day. Given current time determination techniques, most
   congregations today observe only one day. A detailed explanation may
   be found in Gates of Understanding II, page 26.
   
   In Israel, the Progressive Movement observes two days, based on the
   fact that the holiday is referred to as yamim nora'im, the days of
   awe.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.5.4: Traditional Judaism Differences: How does a Reform
         conversion differ from an Orthodox conversion?

Answer:
   
   The biggest difference is implicit. Both conversions require
   acceptance of the "yoke of the mitzvot"; that is, an agreement to live
   as Jews in accordance with Torah (whether or not the specific phrase
   is used). However, the interpretation of that phrase differs
   substantially from Orthodoxy (where it implies acceptance of the
   authority of Rabbinic law as well as all 613 commandments as written)
   to Reform (where it is autonomy and choice based on study). The book
   Conversion According to Reform Halakhah, published in 1990, says "[The
   phrase] 'According to halakhah' means according to our Reform Jewish
   tradition. Over the last two centuries we have developed a
   considerable body of halakhah of our own. Some of it in the form of
   books of guidance (S. B. Freehof Reform Jewish Practice; P. Knobel
   Gates of Mitzvah among others); through statements made at synods and
   conferences (W. G. Plaut The Rise of Reform Judaism; M. Meyer Response
   to Modernity), and through more than a thousand responsa written by
   Solomon B. Freehof and [others]. There is therefore a Reform tradition
   which has been expressed in an expanding halakhah."
   
   Other than that, Reform has different requirements for witnesses.
   Reform in the United States does not require ritual immersion, and
   does not mandate b'rit mila for males (although it is strongly
   recommended); Reform outside of the United States requires both
   milah/hatafah and tevilah, and tends to be more traditional in
   general.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.6.1: The Rabbinate: How does one become a Reform Rabbi?

Answer:
   
   While there are several small seminaries whose rabbis claim to be
   Reform, the following applies only to becoming a part of the Central
   Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR).
   
   Study for the Reform Rabbinate is typically done at the Hebrew Union
   College-Jewish Institute of Religion (HUC-JIR) (http://huc.edu),
   although one could also become a Conservative or Reconstructionist
   Rabbi and then petition to join the Reform Rabbinate. There are also
   foreign Reform Seminaries, such as Leo Baeck, whose ordinations are
   acceptable to the CCAR.
   
   HUC-JIR was founded in 1875 in Cincinnati Ohio, and is the oldest
   rabbinical seminary in the United States ordaining rabbis to serve the
   Reform movement and the Jewish community. It was founded by Rabbi
   Isaac M. Wise, who also established UAHC (1873) and CCAR (1889). In
   1922, Rabbi Stephen S Wise founded the Jewish Institute of Religion in
   New York, which merged with HUC in 1950. The Los Angeles campus
   (located next to USC) was opened in 1954, and the Jerusalem ISRAEL
   branch was established in 1963. The Jerusalem branch serves as the
   center for study of Biblical Archaeology. Thus, there are now four
   campuses (see http://huc.edu/campuses.html for specific addresses).
   
   HUC-JIR's Rabbinic School has a five-year program of full-time
   graduate study leading to the degree of Master of Arts in Hebrew
   Letters (MAHL) and ordination. The sequence is as follows:
   
    1. Have an accredited bachelor's degree from a quality school, with a
       B to B+ average and high GRE scores. Apply to HUC-JIR; 34 to 45
       students over all 3 US campuses are admitted annually. The
       admissions process also includes interviews and psychological
       evaluation. All candidates seeking admission to the
       College-Institute's Rabbinic School, School of Sacred Music and
       Rhea Hirsch School of Education, will be expected to have
       successfully completed a minimum of one academic year of
       college-level Hebrew or its equivalent.
    2. If accepted at HUC-JIR, the path to ordination is as follows:
         1. One year in Israel in which one attends the Jerusalem campus.
            Study includes Biblical Hebrew, Modern Hebrew, archeology,
            and immersion in Israeli culture. [This year is occasionally
            waived for those who can demonstrate fluency in the language
            and texts.]
         2. Four years at one of the USA campuses in NYC, LA, or
            Cincinnati. Note: LA does not ordain. Those attending the LA
            campus must transfer after two years either to NYC or
            Cincinnati. [Occasionally, the 4 years can be compressed to 3
            years if the person can exempt enough courses.] This course
            of study includes Bible, Midrash, Talmud, Codes, Homiletics,
            History, Education, Liturgy, Philosophy, Human Relations,
            Hebrew, and Aramaic.
         3. Internship: Serve a congregation (usually small solo pulpits
            that can't afford full-time rabbis) for at least one year.
    3. Degree awarded: Master of Hebrew Letters (usually after the 4th
       year) and ordination after the 5th year.
       
   For more information, you can write directly to HUC-JIR at one of the
   following addresses:
   
   National Office of Admission            Office of Admissions
   HUC-JIR                                 HUC-JIR, Brookdale Center
   3101 Clifton Avenue                     One West 4th Street
   Cincinnati OH 45220                     New York NY 10012
   USA                                     USA

   Office of Admissions                    Office of Admissions
   HUC-JIR                                 HUC-JIR
   3077 University Avenue                  13 King David Street
   Los Angeles CA 90007                    Jerusalem
   USA                                     ISRAEL

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.6.2: The Rabbinate: What is the course of study for the
         Rabbinate?

Answer:
   
   Biblical Hebrew, Modern Hebrew, archeology, Israeli culture, Bible,
   Midrash, Talmud, Codes, Homiletics, History, Education, Liturgy,
   Philosophy, Human Relations, Hebrew, Aramaic.
   
   There are also courses in professional development: working in a
   professional setting, education principles and techniques, the
   principles of counseling, making hospital calls, helping people with
   crisis.
   
   Specific information on the rabbinic program and admissions can be
   found at http://www.huc.edu/catalog/rab.html,

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.6.3: The Rabbinate: How does one become a Reform Cantor?

Answer:
   
   Cantors in the Reform Movement are trained by HUC-JIR's School of
   Sacred Music (SSM), established in New York in 1948. SSM's campus is
   adjacent to NYU, and offers the degree of Master of Sacred Music (MSM)
   to students who, upon graduation, receive formal investiture as Cantor
   and are eligible for membership in the American Conference of Cantors.
   
   In order to be accepted to the SSM, applicants must demonstrate:
   
   Musical Competence: 
          A trained singing voice, an undergraduate degree (preferrably a
          BA with a major in music), competency in sight reading, ear
          training, keyboard harmony, and music theory.
          
   Hebrew Competence. 
          All cantorial students are expected to have completed at least
          one year of college Hebrew. All candidates participate in the
          first-year Hebrew immersion program at the HUC-JIR campus in
          Jerusalem.
          
   Personal characteristics. 
          Candidates for admission are expected to be committted Jews and
          to possses the necessary character and personality traits. They
          should enjoy public performance, engaging others in the act of
          worship, teaching adults and children, and dedicated to a life
          of learning and discovery.
          
   To apply, applicants require a autobiographical perspective on their
   life and the reasons for selecting the cantorate in addition to the
   usual transcripts, references, and medical forms. The process also
   includes an audition and a formal interview, as well as a
   psychological assessment. Information on the program can be found at
   http://www.huc.edu/catalog/smny.html

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.6.4: The Rabbinate: What is the course of study for
         cantors?

Answer:
   
   The course of study is four years. The first year is in Jerusalem, and
   involves 18 hours per week of Hebrew instruction. There are also
   classes that introduce classical texts. Students also study
   cantillation, the Jewish Choral literature, and the liturgical modes
   on which traditional Nusach is based.
   
   In years two through four, there is indepth study of the year and life
   cycle musical liturgy, as well as the history, structure, and theology
   of the liturgy. The Reform musical heritage is studied, as well as
   study of art music in Ladino, Yiddish, and Hebrew; the art and content
   of Jewish concert programming; music for all ages in the religious
   school. There is also study of Judaica: the traditional Jewish texts
   in light of the scientific investigation of modern times. There is
   study of theology: Buber, Kaplan, Heschel, Rosenzweig, and others.
   There is study of history: talmudic, medieval, or modernity. There are
   also coures in professional development: working in a professional
   setting, education principles and techniques, teaching and integration
   of music, organizing and directing volunteer choirs, the principles of
   counseling, making hospital calls, helping people with crisis. In the
   second and third years, students also have fieldwork opportunities.
   
   For more information, write:
   
    HUC-JIR Brookdale Center
    School of Sacred Music
    Office of the Director
    One West 4th Street
    New York NY 10012
    USA
    
   Information on the program may be found on the web at
   http://www.huc.edu/catalog/smny.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.6.5: The Rabbinate: What other courses of study are
         available?

Answer:
   
   In Los Angeles, the HUC-JIR Irwin Daniels School of Jewish Communal
   Service offers the following programs:
    1. DOUBLE MASTERS 

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service and Master of
            Social Work (24 months, 90 credits). Joint with USC or
            Washington Univ, St. Louis)

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service and Master of
            Public Admin. (24 months, 82 credits)

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service and Master of
            Science in Gerontology (24 months, 86 credits)

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service and Communications
            Management (24 months, 82 credits)
    2. SINGLE MASTERS 

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service (54 credits). A
            concentration in synagogue management is also available.
    3. JOINT MASTERS 

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service and Master of Arts
            in Jewish Education (24 months, 110 credits)

          + Master of Arts in Jewish Communal Service and Master of Arts
            in Judaic Studies (24 months, 110 credits)
       The two programs above also require a year's residency in Israel.
       
   Courses in these programs include the Jewish Family and Jewish
   Community; Jewish Communal Institutes; Biblical and Rabbinic Sources;
   Jewish History; Fund Raising and Financial Resource Development;
   Trends in Modern Judaism; Contemporary Jewish Isuses; the Development
   of the American Synagogue; Management Information Systems; Organizing
   and Facilitating Support Groups; Understanding Communal Themes Through
   Traditional Sources; Leadership and Organizational Management;
   Planning, Allocating, and Decision Making in the Jewish Community;
   Fiscal Management; Jewish Components of Community Practics; Jewish
   Social and Political Policy; Boundaries of Normative Jewish Behavior;
   and other similar courses.
   
   Graduates of these programs work in federations, centers, Jewish
   family services, camps, Bureaus of Jewish education, congragations,
   etc.
   
   For those interested in education, the HUC-JIR Rhea Hirsch School of
   Education offers a course of study designed for those interested in
   careers in Jewish education.
   
   For information on either of these programs, write to:
   
    HUC-JIR
    3077 University Avenue
    Los Angeles CA 90007-3796
    
   In addition, the Cincinatti branch of HUC-JIR is home for the School
   of Graduate Stuides, which is a leading center for study and research
   in the areas of the Bible, ancient Near Eastern languages, Hellenistic
   studies, Jewish religious thought, philosophy and history. For more
   information, write:
   
    HUC-JIR
    3101 Clifton Avenue
    Cincinnati OH 45220
    USA
    
   Information on all of HUCs programs can be found at
   http://www.huc.edu/catalog/progs.html

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.6.6: The Rabbinate: Can Reform Rabbis be sanctioned for
         their beliefs?

Answer:
   
   No. There is no ideological sanction process in the CCAR, although
   some in the CCAR would like to institute one for rabbis who
   co-officiate with Christian clergy at weddings. Of course, there is
   always the community. Rabbis usually have beliefs in congruence with
   the congregation or community that continues to pay their contract. In
   congregations, belief differences often lead to heated temple board
   meetings, and potentially, the Rabbi moving to a different community.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.7.1: For Further Information: How do I contact the main
         organizations in Reform Judaism?

Answer:
   
   In North America:
   
    Union of American Hebrew Congregations
    Central Conference of American Rabbis
    838 Fifth Street
    New York NY 10021-7064

    +1 212 249 0100
    
   A list of regional offices may be found at
   http://uahc.org/offices.html.
   
    World Union for Progressive Judaism
    838 Fifth Avenue
    New York, NY 10021
    phone: (212)650-4090
    fax: (212)650-4099
    
    Hebrew Union College - Jewish Institute of Religion
    
   HUC-JIR                                 HUC-JIR, Brookdale Center
   3101 Clifton Avenue                     One West 4th Street
   Cincinnati OH 45220                     New York NY 10012
   USA                                     USA

   +1 513 221-1875                         +1 212 674 5300

   HUC-JIR                                 HUC-JIR
   3077 University Avenue                  13 King David Street
   Los Angeles CA 90007                    94101 Jerusalem
   USA                                     ISRAEL

   +1 213 749 3424                         +972 2 232 444

   In the United Kingdom:
   
    Union of Liberal and Progressive Synagogues (ULPS)
    The Montague Centre
    21 Maple Street
    London, W1P 6DS
    ENGLAND

    +1 0171-580-1663 (Voice)

    +1 0171-436-4184 (FAX)
    http://www.ulps.org/
    
   Reform Synagogues of Great Britain (http://www.refsyn.org.uk)
   
   In Australia and New Zealand: The Australian and New Zealand Union for
   Progressive Judaism (http://www.anzupj.com.au).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.7.2: For Further Information: How do I find a Reform
         congregation?

Answer:
   
   If you are in Northern America and have web access, visit the UAHC web
   page, where you will find a congregation list at
   http://www.uahcweb.org/conglist.html. Otherwise, contact your local
   regional council (http://www.uahcweb.org/offices.html).
   
   Outside of North America, contact the World Union for Progressive
   Judaism (http://rj.org/wupj). They will be happy to provide the names
   and addresses of synagogues anywhere in the world in response to
   inquiries. In those places where there may be no liberal synagogue,
   they will be happy to send whatever information they have, from other
   sources. Please contact their office, preferably by mail, fax or
   e-mail, at:
   
    World Union for Progressive Judaism
    838 Fifth Avenue
    New York, NY 10021
    phone: (212)650-4090
    fax: (212)650-4099

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.7.3: For Further Information: Are there any Reform
         Rabbis on the network who will answer questions?

Answer:
   
   Yes. First, the Union of American Hebrew Congregations operates a
   service called "Ask the Rabbi". It invites visitors to the UAHC
   website to pose questions about Judaism and Jewish life to be answered
   by a rabbi, or cantor or Jewish educator. It was initiated by the
   UAHC-CCAR Joint Commission on Synagogue Affiliation, and its
   realization was coordinated by Jonah Pesner, and is administered by
   Larry Raphael of the UAHC Department of Adult Jewish Growth.
   
   Additionally, here is a list of Rabbis willing to answer questions:
   
   Rabbi Herbert Brockman <Ravtzvi@aol.com>
          Congregation Mishkan Israel, Hamden CT, USA
          
   Rabbi Michael Feshbach <RABBIF@Aol.Com>
          Temple Anshe Hesed, Erie, Pennsylvania, USA
          
   Rabbi Mark Glickman <mglickman@foxinternet.net>
          Temple Israel, Dayton, Ohio, USA
          
   Rabbi Mark Aaron Kline <RabbiMarc@aol.com>
          Beth Israel Congregation, Florence, South Carolina, USA
          
   Rabbi Howard Jaffe <HLJaffe@Aol.Com>
          Mtn. Jewish Comm. Ctr., Warren, New Jersey, USA
          
   Rabbi Arthur Nemitoff <rabbi@templeisrael.org>
          Temple Israel of Columbus, Columbus, Ohio, USA
          
   Rabbi Kerry Olitzky <olitzky@huc.edu>
          Hebrew Union College
          
   Rabbi Harry Rosenfeld <JSHLR@Acad1.Alaska.Edu>
          Cong. Beth Shalom, Anchorage, Alaska, USA
          
   Rabbi John Sherwood <rabjms@earthlink.net>
          Rabbi Emeritus, Temple Emet, Woodland Hills, California, USA
          
   Rabbi Don Weber <75065.263@Compuserve.Com>
          Temple Rodeph Torah, West Monmouth, New Jersey, USA
          
   Rabbi Stephen Weisman <sweisman@s850.mwc.edu>
          Fredricksburg, Virginia, USA
          
   Rabb Jim Egolf (<RavJim@aol.com>
          Congregation Beth Shalom of the Woodlands, Texas, USA
          
   Reform rabbis who want to be added to this list should contact the FAQ
   maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.7.4: For Further Information: How do I start the
         conversion process?

Answer:
   
   This varies from place to place and rabbi to rabbi. Most larger cities
   have a community class. Smaller cities rely on the rabbi. In any case,
   contact the rabbi at your congregation or a local congregation. If
   there is no rabbi contact the local congregation and they will put you
   in touch with someone.
   
   If you need help, or are unsure about walking into the synagogue,
   there are some rabbis on the net who will be glad to talk to you about
   this important step. You can contact any of the rabbis listed in
   18.7.3 above; in particular, you might want to contact Rabbi Arthur
   Nemitoff <apn@shore.net>. Rabbi Nemitoff is the immediate past chair
   of the CCAR Committee on Conversion and a member of the UAHC/CCAR
   Commission on Reform Jewish Outreach. He can also be reached at:
   
    Temple Ohabei Shalom
    1187 Beacon Street
    Brookline, Massachusetts, 02146 USA
    617-277-6610 Voice-synagogue
    617-277-7881 FAX
    
   Another rabbi who has expressed interested in talking to individuals
   interested in conversion is Rabbi John Sherwood
   <rabjms@earthlink.net>. Rabbi Sherwood is Past President of the San
   Fernando Valley Interfaith Council, and has been an adjunct professor
   at St. John's Roman Catholic Seminary teaching a graduate course on
   Judaism to men studying for the priesthood. He is also the author of a
   curriculum for Introduction to Judaism. Another resource is Rabbi Don
   Weber <75065.263@compuserve.com>, +1 908 972-2595. Rabbi Weber is on
   the UAHC Regional Outreach Committee, and has spoken on conversion at
   HUC and at meetings of the Reform Rabbinate. He is a member of the
   NJARR beit din, and says that he follows quite traditional practices
   regarding conversion.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 18.7.4: For Further Information: I'd like to do some
         further reading. Where do I start?

Answer:
   
   The best place to start is with the Reform Reading List, available at
   http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/jlu-index.html

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Credits for the Reform/Progressive FAQ

   The Reform FAQ portion of the S.C.J FAQ was developed and is
   maintained by Daniel Faigin (maintainer@scjfaq.org). Other
   contributors include Nicholas Aleksander, J. T. Galkowski, Ruth
   Heiges, Chris Newport, Tony Reese, Rabbi Harry Rosenfeld, Rabbi Ian
   Morris, Rabbi Josh Segal, and Rabbi John Sherwood. This posting is
   dedicated to Rabbi Mordecai Soloff ZT"L and Rabbi Alfred Wolf: two men
   responsible for my committment to serious Reform Jewish.
   
   Comments and corrections are welcome. Please send them to the
   maintainer, maintainer@scjfaq.org or faigin@acm.org; do not post them.
   Unlike other portions of the S.C.J FAQ, this posting does not reflect
   the traditional viewpoint; it specifically reflects the viewpoint of
   the Reform Movement of Judaism. However, to the best of the
   maintainer's knowledge, the posting does not contain any "bashing" of
   other Jewish movements.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.09.10 06:55


End of SCJ FAQ Part 10 (Reform) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:10 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yj-000OVxC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:09 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05139
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:23:43 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 603A97A13C
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:14 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id B18137A13D
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:08 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28077 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:33 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:33 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032533.28076.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 11-Miscellaneous
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 74246
Lines: 1858

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Miscellaneous and References (11/12)
Approved: news-answers-request@MIT.Edu,scjm-approval@scjm.org
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.11>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/11-Miscellaneous
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Miscellaneous Question, Getting Access, Regular Postings, Software
Message-ID: <faq.11_970942022@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/11-Miscellaneous
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.11-Miscellaneous
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
                    Part 11: Miscellaneous and References
                    [Last Post: Sat Oct  7 11:07:08 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:

    1. I want to become more observant. Where do I start? 
    2. Why is "shabbat" spelled sometimes shabbath, shabbath, shabbos, 
    3. What are some common Hebrew and Yiddish phrases I see on S.C.J? 
    4. What do all those abbreviations like Z"L mean? 
    5. Is "shvartze" offensive? Is "goyim" offensive? 
    6. What does "shiksa" and "shaygetz" mean? 
    7. I am going to be in (name your city), where can I eat, stay for
       Shabbat?
    8. What do bagels, lox, pastrami, falafel, garlic pickles, kishka,
       and kasha have to do with being a Jew? 
    9. What does Warren Burstein's signature mean? 
   10. Who was the sixth Marx brother? 
   11. Why do Hebrew clocks run clockwise, not counter-clockwise? 
   12. I'm not Jewish. How do I show my love for the Jewish people? 
   13. What is the origin of the word "kike"? 

    1. I'd like to learn more? Do you have any books to recommend? 
    2. What are the different hechsher symbols? 
    3. Where can I find Jewish-oriented mailing lists? 
    4. What are the good Jewish search engines?
    5. What are some good Jewish links on the WWW?
    6. Is S.C.J available via a Listserv or other e-mail means? 
    7. What divrei Torah are posted to Usenet? 
    8. Where can I find collected divrei Torah? 
    9. What software is available for Hebrew applications? 
   10. What other Jewish software is available? 
   11. Are there any Jewish Libraries on the Internet? 
   12. I'm interested in ordering books or music on the internet. Where
       should I look?
   13. Boy, you did a wonderful job on the FAQ? How do I show my
       appreciation? 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.1: I want to become more observant. Where do I start?

Answer:
   
   Coming from a background of nothing, the best thing you can do first
   is to find someone who is already observant with whom you are
   comfortable and discuss the issues involved.
   
   Join a directed study group designed for "Baalei Tshuva". It is
   impossible to be a practicing Jew (of any type) without the knowledge
   of what you are practicing. There are groups within many communities
   which are set up to do this. Examples include Chabad Lubavitch, Aish
   Hatorah seminars, and NCSY youth groups. Non-Orthodox Jews also do
   outreach, but in common parlance, baal teshuvah refers to someone who
   adopts Orthodox Judaism.
   
   The best advice is often to go slowly, decide what you are going to
   do, and don't let difficulties with particular levels of observance
   cause you to drop the whole matter. Find a sympathetic rabbi who will
   help and advise you. Avoid the "All or Nothing" syndrome.
   
   Most of all remember that you are not alone. If you scan the list of
   mailing lists in Section 20.3, you'll even discover there are numerous
   Baal Teshuva electronic mailing lists (there is at least one on
   Shamash).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.2: Why is "shabbat" spelled sometimes shabbath,
         shabbath, shabbos, shabbes?

Answer:
   
   The Hebrew word is as follows, and it's pronounced in various ways:
      ___  __   _ _ *
      |  | . |  | | |
     _|  | __|_ |/_/
            T    --

   "Shabbos" and "Shabbat" are examples. The final letter in the word is
   pronounced as "s" by Ashkenazis, as "t" by Sephardim, and as "th" by
   Yemenites and (according to some scholars) speakers of Hebrew around
   the year 3700. "Sabbath" is an anglicization of the Hebrew.
   Ephraimites may have been the actual source of this variant, as in
   Judges 12, it is reported that they were not able to pronounce the
   letter shin. It's all the same word, and the pronunciations are used
   interchangeably in this FAQ. Same with Kashrus/Kashrut/Kashruth.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.3: What are some common Hebrew and Yiddish phrases I see
         on SCJ?

Answer:
   
   Most people are careful to translate their Hebrew and Yiddish, but a
   few are common enough that people don't bother. Credit goes to
   Meredith Warshaw for compiling much of the list below. [H] indicates
   Hebrew, [Y] indicates Yiddish.

     * Agunah (literal translation: chained).
       A woman who cannot remarry; usually because her husband refuses to
       give her a get (divorce), because there is no way to verify
       whether or not he is dead, or because he is incompetent to give a
       divorce (i.e., mentally ill). [H]

     * Assur
       Something prohibited. [H]

     * Averah (aveira)
       Sin, transgression of God's will [H]

     * Baal Tefillah
       Prayer leader [H]

     * Ba'al Teshuvah (literal translation: master of return)
       A penitent; a Jew who returns to a traditional observant Jewish
       lifestyle (also known by the acronym BT) [H]

     * B'chor
       Firstborn status [H]

     * Barmidbar (literal translation: in the desert)
       Numbers (4th book of the Torah) [H]

     * Bet Din
       Court of Jewish law [H]

     * Bikkur Cholim
       Visiting the ill or hospitalized [H]

     * Bracha (pl. brachot)
       Blessing [H]

     * B'reshit (literal translation: in the beginning)
       Genesis (1st book of the Torah) [H]

     * B'rit milah
       Covenant of circumcision [H]

     * B'shaah tova
       Congratulations to an expectent mother (literarily "in a good
       hour," means "at an auspicious time," i.e. may whatever time your
       child is born be a good time.") Also the correct response to
       announcement of a marriage engagement. In both cases, it is in
       anticipation of a "mazel tov" for something hoped for, that has
       not yet occurred. [H]

     * Chag sameach
       A happy holiday (used as a greeting) [H]

     * Chayav
       One who is obligated (chiyuv=obligation) [H]

     * Chazzan (hazzan)
       Cantor [H]

     * Cherem
       Excommunication (from cessation of aid, boycott) [H]

     * Cheshbon Hanefesh (Literal translation: accounting of the soul)
       Self-examination of your actions' merit, or accounting of your
       soul's good and bad aspects. [H]

     * Chevra
       Friends; comrades [H]

     * Chevra Kadisha (Literal translation: holy society)
       The group that prepares a body for burial. [H]

     * Chillul Hashem
       Desecration of the divine name [H]

     * Chok (pl. chukim)
       Law from the Torah deemed to be without a humanly-discernable
       rationale, e.g., the red heifer. [H]

     * Chometz (chametz, hametz)
       Leavened food, which is forbidden during Pesach [H]

     * Chumash
       The five books of the Torah, bound in one volume (not a scroll)
       [H]

     * Chumra 
       Stringency -- custom of a community to observe more strictly [H]

     * "Dati/lo dati" 
       Dati = religious, lo dati=not religious, as used in current Hebrew
       in Israel, but it is a black and white distinction, meaning
       Orthodox and not Orthodox. [H]

     * Daven
       Pray (from Yiddish, with a particular emotional sense) [H]

     * Derech Eretz
       Respectful, menschlich, considerate of others [H]

     * Din
       Law, judgment [H]

     * Drasha
       Interpretation of a Torah passage (often a creative
       interpretation) (from a root meaning "search") [H]

     * Dukhn
       Perform the kohen's blessing before the congregation [H]

     * D'var torah (pl. divrei torah) (Literal translation: word of
       Torah)
       A Torah discourse, homily or sermon [H]

     * D'varim (Literal translation: words, things)
       5th book of the Torah (Deuteronomy) [H]

     * Emet 
       Truth [H]

     * Emunah 
       Faith [H]

     * Frum 
       Observant (often with a right-wing Orthodox implication) [H]

     * Gemara (Literal translation: learning, from the Aramaic)
       The later part of the Talmud, which expands upon the Mishna [H]

     * Get (pl. gittin)
       Document of divorce [H]

     * G'milut Chasadim
       Acts of loving kindess [H]

     * Hachamim (chachamim)
       Sages [H]

     * Haftarah
       The selection from the book of prophets read after the Torah
       reading. [H]

     * Halacha (Literal translation: path)
       Jewish law [H]

     * Halbanat Panim (literal translation: whitening the face)
       Causing someone to blanch by public embarrassment [H]

     * Hashgacha 
       Ritual supervision, most often used in terms of kashrut/dietary
       laws, although it can also refer to spiritual or moral supervision
       as in a yeshiva or dormitory [H]

     * Heksher 
       Kosher certification [H]

     * Hesed (chessed)
       Kindness [H]

     * Heter
       Permission (usually a rabbinic ruling that permits something) [H]

     * Hiddur Mitzvah
       Beautifying physical objects involved in a mitzvah, or otherwise
       adding to a mitzvah an esthetic sense [H]

     * Kabbalat ol Mitzvot (literal translation: acceptance of the yoke
       of the commandments)
       Acceptance of commandments as binding [H]

     * Kabbalat Shabbat 
       Service welcoming the Sabbath [H]

     * Kavanah 
       Intention, devotion, inner concentration during prayer [H]

     * Kevah 
       Fixed; a fixed time; fixed words or prayer (often contrasted with
       kavanah, inner concertration during prayer) [H]

     * Kiddush Hashem 
       Sanctification of the divine name; martyrdom [H]

     * Kiddushin 
       Betrothal (for the purpose of marriage) [H]

     * Klal 
       A general principle [H]

     * Klal Yisrael 
       The Jewish community as a whole [H]

     * Koach 
       Strength [H]

     * Kohelet 
       The book of Ecclesiastes [H]

     * Kol Hakavod (literal translation: all honor)
       Used idiomatically to express praise or congratulations for an
       achievement [H]

     * Kol Isha 
       The voice of a women (considered by the Rabbis of the Talmud to be
       distracting to men and thus lewd). [H]

     * Kol Tuv 
       Everything good (may you be blessed with everything good) [H]

     * Kulot 
       Leniencies [H]

     * K'vod Hatzibur 
       The honor of the community [H]

     * L'shon Hara (Literal translation: "evil tongue")
       Defaming or badmouthing [H]

     * Leyn 
       To read (usually to read Torah) [Y]

     * Maariv 
       Evening; the evening prayer service [H]

     * Machmeer 
       Stringent; one who observes a chumrah (stringency) [H]

     * Maftir 
       The aliyah consisting of the last few lines of the Torah reading,
       or the person assigned that aliyah. The person assigned the maftir
       aliyah also chants Haftarah. [H]

     * Mamzer 
       A person born from a prohibited union (i.e., from an incestuous or
       adulterous union) [H]

     * Mara d'atra (literal translation: master of the place)
       The local rabbi, whose decision carries the force of law in that
       locality [Aramaic]

     * Mashgichim 
       Ritual supervisers of kashrut who watch/supervise on the premises
       for dietary supervision of ingedients, food preparation, serving,
       dishes and cutlery, etc. [H]

     * Mashiach (Moshiach) 
       Messiah [H]

     * Mechitsa 
       Division; a barrier separating men from women in the synagogue [H]

     * Midrash 
       An interpretation; a story that fills in gaps in the Torah
       narrative, or answers questions about the narrative; (when
       capitalized) any of several volumes of such stories compiled by
       rabbis of the Talmudic era [H]

     * Mincha 
       The afternoon prayer service [H]

     * Minhag 
       Custom [H]

     * Minhag ha-makom 
       Local custom [H]

     * Minyan 
       Quorum of 10 needed for a public prayer service. In traditional
       synagogues, only men over the age of 13 are counted towards a
       minyan. Liberal (non-orthodox) congregations also include women
       over 12 in the count. [H]

     * Mishna (Capitalized)
       The early core of the Talmud, consisting primarily of case law
       decisions. (Not capitalized) one unit, typically a single sentence
       or short paragraph, in the Mishna. [H]

     * Mishpat (pl. mishpatim)
       Law from the Torah that can be rationalized [H]

     * Mitzvah 
       Commandment; not "good deed" in Hebrew, but has come to mean that
       in Yiddish, especially among more secular people [H]

     * Mutar 
       Permitted [H]

     * Ner tamid 
       Eternal light [H]

     * Nigun (pl. nigunim)
       Wordless prayer melody, usually repeated many times over to create
       a spiritual mood [H]

     * "Nu?" 
       This is an exclamation used in the same sense as "well" "eh" and
       "hey." [Y] It could be used in the Hebrew/Yiddish translation of
       any of the following:
         1. Well, do you want the egg roll or the knish?
         2. Hey! Stop throwing paper airplanes in class.
         3. My experimental tofu-liver-garlic cholent tastes good, eh?
         4. So, Becca, I hear you and Izzy went out last week. Well?
         5. A rebuke (on small kids): "Nu, nu, nu, you spiled all the
            milk!
         6. To express doubt: "I heard that Rabin met Asad. Nu."
         7. When the news ain't new no more: (see #7; the change is in
            the tone of the "nu").
         8. As "come on": NU BEMET.
         9. When one can't talk (i.e. in the middle of Shmone-Esre, after
            Netila before Hamotzi, etc.)

     * Olam ha-ba 
       The world to come [H]

     * Parsha (N)
       The weekly Torah portion (pl. parshiot) [H]

     * Patur 
       Something or someone who is exempt (from an obligation or a law)
       [H]

     * Pikuah Nefesh 
       To save a life (usually in context of breaking Shabbat, etc.) [H]

     * Posek (pl. poskim) (N)
       The rabbi one consults for halachic decisions; an authority on
       Jewish Law [H]

     * Posken (V)
       To render an halachic ruling, usually one that clarifies the law
       in a specific case [H]

     * Psak (N)
       Decision, verdict [H]

     * R'chilut 
       Gossip [H]

     * Ribono shel Olam 
       Master of the universe [H]

     * Rosh Chodesh 
       First day of the new Jewish month [H]

     * Ruach 
       Spirit, wind [H]

     * Sedra 
       The weekly Torah portion [H]

     * Shachrit 
       Morning; the morning prayer service [H]

     * Shaliach 
       Emmisary, appointed agent (male pl. sh'lichim, sh'lichei; fem.
       sing. sh'lichah; fem. pl. sh'lichot) [H]

     * Shaliach Tzibur 
       The person leading services [H]

     * Sh'lom bayit 
       Peace in the home [H]

     * Shekhinah (Literal translation: that which dwells)
       God's presence (often associated with feminine imagery, but not
       always) [H]

     * Shir Ha Shirim 
       Song of Songs [H]

     * Sh'mot (Literal translation: names)
       The 2nd book of the Torah (Exodus) [H]

     * Shomer (pl. shomrim)
       Watchman, guardian [H]

     * Shomer shabbat 
       Observant of the laws of Shabbat [H]

     * Shoresh 
       Root of a word (all hebrew verbs have a 3-4 letter root that is
       the basis of conjugation. many other parts of speach (adj, nouns)
       are also derived from this same shoresh) [H]

     * Shtiebel 
       A small synagogue [Y]

     * Sinat chinam 
       Gratuitous hatred [H]

     * Taharah (pl. taharot)
       Ritual purity [H]

     * Takkanah (N)
       Correction; a rabbinic edict that supersedes the existing halachah
       (pl. takkanot) [H]

     * Tanach 
       Acronym for Torah Nevi'im K'tuvim - Torah, Prophets, Writings)
       The three divisions of the Hebrew Bible [H]

     * Tana'im 
       Sages of the Mishnaic period [H]

     * Tefila 
       Prayer [H]

     * Teshuva 
       Return, repentance [H]

     * T'hillim 
       Psalms [H]

     * Tikkun Olam 
       Correcting the world, repairing the world; an action promoting
       social justice [H]

     * Torah misinai 
       (Definition: lit, Torah from Mount Sinai)
       Refers to the doctrine that the entire Torah, including the Oral
       Law, was given to Moses at Sinai. [H]

     * Tsniut 
       Modesty [H]

     * Tzedakah 
       Righteousness; used for charitable donations, though the root has
       a very different sense from the root of "charity." [H]

     * Vayikrah (Literal translation: "and He called")
       3rd book of the Torah (Leviticus) [H]

     * Yahrzeit (literal translation: year-time)
       Anniversary of a death; a 24-hour candle lit to commemorate the
       death anniversary of a close relative, also lit on holy days when
       Yizkor (prayer of remembrance) is recited [Y]

     * Yasher koach (Literal translation: meaning unclear, but poss.
       "straight strength")
       Used idiomatically to express praise or thanks for serving in a
       religious or ceremonial role. Implies "may your stength continue,
       go on straight", i.e. "You done good! Do it many times more!" [H]

     * Yotzei (Literal translation: gone out)
       One who has properly fulfilled an obligation [H]
       
   NOTE on spelling/transliteration: Some people transliterate the letter
   "het" as "ch," and others as "h." (Better would be "h" with a dot
   under it, but that's not possible in email. This also ignores the
   linguists, who prefer "x.") Thus: "hag/chag sameah/sameach," "bikkur
   holim/cholim," etc. All the terms beginning with "ch" on the list are
   "het" words.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.4: What do all those abbreviations like Z"L mean?

Answer:
   
   Those abbreviation are shorthand for common Hebrew phrases. Here are
   some of the most common ones:
   
   A"H 
          (Alav (Male), Aleha (Female) Hashalom)
          

          + For any deceased Jew.

          + Translation: Peace Be Upon Him/Her

          + Sometimes written as PBUH, generally by Muslims.
            
   Admo"r 
          (Adonainu, Morainu, VeRabbeinu)
          

          + Translation: Our Master, Our Teacher, and Our Rebbe

          + Honorific title given to scholarly leaders of a Jewish
            community, "R' Ploni Almoni, SHLITA, Admor of Chelm.")

          + This is usually a specifically Hassidic term.
            
   AMUSh 
          (Ad Maia Veesrim Shana)
          

          + Translation: [He/She should live] for 120 years

          + Used for salutations in correspondence: "Dear Ploni AMU"Sh"
            
   B"H 
          (Baruch Hashem)
          

          + Translation: Blessed be G-d (occasionally) (B'Ezras/Ezer
            Hashem)

          + Translation: With G-d's help (i.e. at top of papers,
            sometimes with an ayin following the beis)
            
   B"N 
          (B'li Neder)
          

          + Translation: Without taking a vow

          + Used after a promise, since failure to fulfill a promise is a
            serious violation of Jewish law. For example, "I'll check
            that reference tomorrow, B"N." (i.e., if I forget, I don't
            want to be liable under Jewish law).
            
   BLA"H 
          (B'li Ayin Hara) or (K'ain Ayin Hara)
          

          + Translation: "without the 'evil eye'"

          + Meaning: "I'm saying this without hubris"

          + Often pronounced Kanaina horo (Yiddish)
            
   BS"D 
          (B'siyata d'shmaya) (Aramaic)
          

          + Translation: With the help of heaven (common)
            
   HY"D 
          (Hashem Yikom Damo[am])
          

          + For martyred Jews.

          + Translation: Hashem will avenge his[their] Blood
            
   IY"H, IYH 
          (Im Yirtzeh Hashem)
          

          + Translation: If it be G-d's will (very common)

          + Used for referring to future actions: "I'll see you tomorrow
            IY"H."
            
   N"E 
          (Nishmaso(male)/Nishmasa(Female) b'Eden)
          

          + Translation: His/Her soul should be in Eden/paradise
            
   R'
          (Rabbi)
          
   ShLIT"A 
          (SHe'yikhye Lirot Yamim Tovim ve'Arukim)
          

          + Used for living prominent Jewish scholars.

          + Translation: That he/she should live to see good and full
            days (long life)
            
   YM"SH,Y'Sh,Y"ShU 
          (Yemach Shmo Vezichro)
          

          + For deceased enemies of the Jewish people

          + Translation: May his name be wiped out (YH"SH, Y'Sh); May his
            name and memory be wiped out (Y'Shu)
            
   Z"L 
          (Zichrono Livrocho)
          

          + For deceased prominent Jewish scholars.

          + Translation: Of Blessed Memory

          + Sometimes written as OBM
            
   ZT"L 
          (Zecher Tzadik Livrocho)
          

          + For deceased prominent Jewish scholars.

          + Translation: The Memory of the Righteous is a Blessing

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.5: Is "shvartze" offensive? Is "goyim" offensive?

Answer:
   
   "Shvartze" is the neutral Yiddish term for "black", including the
   person. There are other derogatory terms--some borrowed from English.
   But there are Jews who can make "shvartze" offensive. However, even
   though the meaning of the term isn't offensive, that doesn't mean that
   the word hasn't acquired an offensive connotation over time. This is
   the case with "shvartze". Historically, it was used in a nonneutral
   way, regardless of its neutral meaning. In general, the term should be
   avoided. Note that "shvartze" is also used to describe strict
   observance. [From the black clothing often worn by the very
   observance. See Section 11.1, question 6 for more details on this.]
   
   "Goy" [plural: goyim, adjective: goyishe] is the standard Hebrew term
   for non-Jew. Literally it is the Hebrew for "nation." Spoken aloud
   with a disgusted inflection, it's pejorative. So is the word 'Jew' in
   similar circumstances. Better to say "gentile" when writing in English
   for a multireligious audience, such as SCJ.
   
   In the phrase "shabbos goy"--a gentile who does things for Jews on
   Shabbos--it is neutral, yet when refusing to do something for someone
   by saying "I'm not your shabbos goy", it carries a derogatory tinge.
   
   Some also suggest avoiding the term "Marrano", which means "pig".
   Depending on the intended meaning, the terms "Sephardic" or
   "Crypto-Jew" are more appropriate.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.6: What does "shiksa" and "shaygetz" mean? How offensive
         are they?

Answer:
   
   Shiksa and Shaygetz are the Yiddish derivative of the respective
   feminine and masculine Hebrew words for something unclean, dirty. The
   appellations are customarily applied to gentiles who do things
   inimical to Jewish interests, such as vandalizing Jewish buildings,
   robbing Jewish kids of their lunch money, or becoming romantically
   involved with Jews :-). In Israel, shaygetz is sometimes used to refer
   to a misbehaving child.
   
   Note that use of these terms is considered by many to be insulting. It
   is much better to use neutral terms such as non-Jew.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.7: I am going to be in (name your city), where can I
         eat, stay for Shabbat.

Answer:
   
   Go to your local library and request a telephone directory for that
   city. Look up "Synagogues-(your affiliation" and call them up. Ask to
   be directed to the Hospitality Committee, which is in charge of such
   arrangements. Alternatively, a short post to SCJ can get you
   up-to-date information about cities from their residents (and possibly
   an invitation to dinner and a friend at the service).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.8: What do bagels, lox, pastrami, falafel, garlic
         pickles, kishka, and kasha have to do with being a Jew?

Answer:
   
   Those are foods popular in some cultures in which Jews lived, but have
   zero religious significance. They are sometimes called "Jewish foods"
   because of their popularity among Jews, and because they bring back
   memories of one's ancestors who ate similar foods.
   
   In Ashkenazi communities, Gefilte fish goes beyond being a food of the
   larger community adopted by the Jewish community. In these
   communities, there was a custom to have fish, wine, and meat on the
   Sabbath. On the Sabbath, one may not separate "bad from good" such as
   removing bones from fish. (Good from bad, i.e. fish from bone is
   OK...) To simplify matters, it became popular to serve ground fish
   from which bones were removed.
   
   Another Jewish dish is cholent, a stew left to simmer throughout
   Shabbos, because this a) avoids cooking on Shabbos b) reaffirms the
   belief in oral Torah, permitting the use of a fire lit before shabbos,
   as opposed to the Karaites, who rejected the oral Torah and didn't use
   fire on Shabbos. The cholent is then eaten for the Sabbath afternoon
   meal.
   
   One of the problems with Jewish cooking is that you can eat an entire
   meal, yet not even 72 hours later, you're hungry for more. (:-)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.9: What does Warren Burstein's signature mean?

Answer:
   
   The original signature quote said "The world is a very strange carrot,
   but the farmer is not worried at all." This is a pun on R' Nachman of
   Braslav's saying "Kol Haolom Kulo Gesher (Gezer) Tzar (Zar) Meod
   Vehaikar (Aleph & Ayin diff) Lo Lephached Klal," which actually says
   "The whole world is like a very narrow bridge, and the main idea is
   not to be worried at all."

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.10: Who was the sixth Marx brother?

Answer:
   
   The sixth Marx brother Karl turned his comedic skills to literature.
   He wrote a spoof of an economic treatise which parodied the ponderous
   "scientific" tomes of his day. Unfortunately, people with no sense of
   humor took him seriously and attempted to carry out the philosophy he
   used in the book. It was as if the English had attempted to carry out
   Jonathan Swift's "A modest proposal" and the results were just as
   tragic.
   
   The last czar of the Russian Empire (Mikhail I of the House of
   Gorbachev) finally admitted this and abdicated, and there was much
   rejoicing.
   
   [For the humor-impared, to quote Foghorn Leghorn, "the above was a
   joke, son."]

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.11: Why do Hebrew clocks run clockwise, not counter-
         clockwise?

Answer:
   
   Some do, but I wouldn't lose sleep over this question. FYI, the clock
   on the tower of the Prague Jewish Community Center uses Hebrew letters
   and runs counter-clockwise.
   
   Most clocks use Arabic numerals, another right-to-left language. The
   real question is why Roman numeral clocks don't go the other way.
   
   Note that the direction of the written language has nothing whatsoever
   to do with the way clocks run.
   
   The clock is a mechanical timepiece modeled on its predecessor, the
   sundial. North of the Tropic of Cancer, the sun affects the sundial in
   the following way:

     * Sun rises in the east: shadow falls in the west.

     * Sun, at noon, is south: shadow falls in the north.

     * Sun sets in the west: shadow falls in the east.
       
   The shadow moves in a W to N to E rotation, which is what we call
   "clockwise." When mechanical clocks were invented, this rotation was
   duplicated. Regardless of the direction of your written language, the
   clock hands move the wrong way half the time!
   
   South of the Tropic of Capricorn, a sundial moves counter-clockwise,
   and between the tropics, the motion of the shadow depends on the time
   of year. Had the clock been an invention of South American Indians or
   Southern Africans, "clockwise" would likely mean the opposite
   rotation.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.12: I'm not Jewish. How do I show my love for the Jewish
         people?

Answer:
   
   Do: discourage anti-Jewish behavior, object to stereotyping, humbly
   follow the seven laws and behave morally, support the existence of
   Israel, support religious freedom and sensitivity to others'
   practices, be friendly to Jews, encourage your friends to do likewise.
   Don't:

     * Proselytize/witness/missionize to Jews. We are comitted to Judaism
       just as you are comitted to your religion.

     * Date or marry Jews without an intention to convert. The
       preservation of the Jewish people is strengthened when both
       partners are Jewish and have a comittment to raise their children
       Jewish.

     * Give ham/pork/shellfish to Jews. This shows a lack of respect for
       commonly known laws regarding Kosher food.

     * Force a Jew to work from Friday night to Saturday night or on
       Jewish holidays. This again shows a lack of respect for Jewish
       holy days.

     * Tell "JAP" jokes. This perpetuates an derogatory stereotype that
       has no truth.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 19.13: What is the origin of the word "kike"?

Answer:
   
   The word kike originates from the word "keikl", in Yiddish, which
   means "circle", the reason being that the first Jewish immigrants in
   America, who were unable to sign their names, signed with a circle
   instead of a cross.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.1: I'd like to learn more? Do you have any books to
         recommend?

Answer:
   
   Funny thing you should ask. I just happen to have a reading list for
   you.
   
   Seriously, there are quite a lot of excellent Jewish books. We have
   attempted to summarize these in the S.C.J. Reading Lists
   (http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/). These lists include information on
   general Judaism, traditional Judaism, Jewish mysticism,
   Reform/Progressive Judaism, Conservative Judaism, Reconstructionist
   Judaism, Humanistic Judaism, Chassidism, Antisemitism, Zionism,
   Intermarriage and Conversion, and Childrens Books.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.2: What are the different hechsher symbols?

Answer:
   
   You'll have to keep informed. Note that in most states, "K" does not
   necessarily mean that the product has rabbinical supervision, so you
   can't rely on the simple K. Of course, many products with a "K" are
   kosher anyway, as are many unmarked products. The circled-U,
   circled-K, K-in-a-five-pointed-star, and k-in-a-letter-chaf are widely
   accepted nationally-known kosher symbols. Other accepted kosher
   symbols are only found in small local areas.
   
   In the Periodicals Reading List, you'll find a number of magazines
   focused on Kashrut. These magazines often publish information on who
   is behind the various hechshers. In particular, every year, Kashrus
   Magazine publishes an index to all the Kosher symbols and the people
   behind them. You can reach Kashrus Magazine on the net at
   (<http://www.kosherinfo.com/>).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.3: Where can I find Jewish-oriented mailing lists?

Answer:
   
   My, how times have changed. When this FAQ was first written, there
   were a few general lists (the Global Jewish Information List,
   Mail.Jewish, Mail.Liberal-Judaism, and some Chabad lists). Since then,
   the Internet has exploded, and there are more lists then there are
   commandments in the Torah. Furthermore, the lists of lists, and their
   locations, change so frequently it is hard to keep up.
   
   First, some general comments:

     * Most lists operate using software such as listserv, listproc, or
       majordomo. With this software, you send a subscription address to
       a general list address, in a predefined format (for example, to
       subscribe to MLJ (mail.liberal-judaism), you send a message of the
       form "subscribe mlj yourfirstname yourlastname" to
       listproc@shamash.org). There is a different address you use for
       submissions to the list.

     * Some lists provide an easy to use web interface for subscription
       and unsubscription (to continue the example, for MLJ you would
       visit http://www.mljewish.org/). Often, such an interface is
       easier to use.
       
   Having said that, here are some of the major places to find lists.

     * Shamash.Org. Shamash (the home of the SCJ FAQ) is a central
       information repository for the Jewish community. It provides a
       large number of mailing lists, including mail.jewish and
       mail.liberal-judaism (two of the oldest). A list of all Shamash
       lists may be found at
       http://www.shamash.org/help/listoflists.html. You can also send
       the command "lists" to listproc@shamash.org. Listproc based.

     * Virtual Jerusalem. When the FAQ started, Virtual Jerusalem was
       called Jerusalem One, and was just beginning to host lists. Now
       Virtual Jerusalem, it is a major Jewish portal and a major home to
       Jewish lists. A list of all Virtual Jerusalem lists (combined with
       a subscription form) may be found at http://vjlists.com/

     * Egroups. Another major source of Jewish lists is the Egroups
       server, which provides people with an easy mechanism to set up
       lists. The list of Jewish Egroups lists may be found at
       http://www.egroups.com/dir/Society/Religion_and_Spirituality/Judai
       sm
       
   There are also some organizations that provide mailing lists focused
   primarily on teaching Torah. Some of these organizations include:

     * Chabad. Subscription information on the Chabad lists may be found
       at http://www.chabad.org/subscribe.html.

     * Project Genesis. Subscription information on Project Genesis lists
       may be found at http://www.torah.org/subscribe/.

     * Ohr Sameyach. The Ohr Samayech lists are managed by Virtual
       Jerusalem, and may be found at http://vjlists.com/

     * UTJ. The Union for Traditional Judaism sponsors quite a few lists.
       Information may be found at
       http://www.jump.net/~austinjc/lists/main.html
       
   You will also find that most of the congregational and rabbinic
   organizations have mailing lists, such as UAHC (http://www.uahc.org/),
   Jewish Theological Seminary (http://www.jtsa.edu), and so forth.
   
   Another good way to find mailing lists is through a normal Internet
   meta-search engine (i.e., one that searches multiple indexes), such as
   http://www.dogpile.com/. Try searching for "Jewish Mailing Lists". The
   Liszt server at http://www.liszt.com/select/Religion/Jewish/ also
   provides a list of a few Jewish mailing lists.
   
   Another good source for mailing list info is The Directory of Jewish
   Electronic Services, which is part of the Global Jewish Information
   Network server at http://www.jewishnet.net/. The specific URL for the
   list of mailing lists is http://www.jewishnet.net/subjects/lis.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.4: What are the good Jewish search engines?

Answer:
   
   There are quite a few, and the number is growing every day. The
   following are particularly recommended (in alphabetical order):

     * Golem (http://www.crosswinds.net/~golem1): "Golem - Jewish
       Hypersearch is a truly intelligent creature. As a matter of fact
       it may be the best Jewish search engine available on the
       internet."

     * HaReshima (http://www.hareshima.com/): "Your Gateway to Jewish and
       Israel Internet Sites"

     * Jewishstar (http://www.jewishstar.com/): "The source for the
       Internet's Best Jewish and Israel Weblinks"

     * Maven (http://www.maven.co.il/): "The Portal Directory to the
       Jewish World"

     * MishMash (http://mishmash.virtualave.net/): "Over 10,000 links to
       all things Jewish"

     * Nu? The JAFI Portal (http://www.jewishsites.org/): A search
       service of the Jewish Agency.

     * Zipple (http://www.zipple.com/): "The Jewish Supersite"
       
   If you have other specifically Jewish search engines to add to this
   list, please contact the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.5: What are some good Jewish links on the WWW?

Answer:
   You couldn't have asked an easy question, could you. There are *lots*,
   and I mean *lots* of Jewish links. The FAQ used to contain a list of
   links, but keeping this list up-to-date grew increasingly difficult
   (we're talking about 25 pages of links!). Instead, here is a list of
   some of the best "central link" sites, from which you should be able
   to find other resources.

     * Judaism and Jewish Resources World Wide Web Site. This site has
       over 400 links, including all major Jewish, Hebrew, and Israeli
       resources on the World Wide Web
       <http://shamash.org/trb/judaism.html>.

     * Conversion Web Site (<http://www.convert.org>). Dr. Lawrence J.
       Epstein, a member of the Joint Commission on Intermarriage of the
       Rabbinical Assembly/United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism, and
       an author of a number of books, pamphlets and articles on
       conversion, has set up this web page for those seeking information
       on conversion to Judaism. Although Conservative Judaism is
       emphasized, USA addresses and phone numbers for obtaining
       information from the Orthodox (RCA), Reform and Reconstructionist
       movements are provided.

     * Youth Movement Web Sites. Link Pages.
       <http://www.youth.org.il/mov.htm>

     * Jewish Feminist Website. A collection of pointers to Jewish
       Feminist Resources.
       (<http://world.std.com/~alevin/jewishfeminist.html>)

     * Orthodox Union. From here, you can get to numerous pages on
       Kashrut, including an article on Thinking Kosher, a primer on
       Kashrut, and Kosher Talk, a jumping off point for accessing the OU
       Kashuth Databases. (<http://www.ou.org/>)

     * JewishGen: The Official Home of Jewish Genealogy. If you are
       looking for Jewish Geneological Information, this is the place.
       There's too much here to describe succinctly.
       (<http://www.jewishgen.com/>)

     * SABRAnet -- Where Israel comes alive on the Internet. These pages
       provide links of news and information, as well as original text,
       images, chat, and multimedia features relating to the State of
       Israel. (<http://www.sabranet.com/>)

     * Project Genesis: Torah on the Information Superhighway. The top of
       a series of pages dedicated to the learning of Torah, with
       extensive archives and links to other Jewish learning sites.
       Orthodox perspective. (<http://www.torah.org/>)

     * Torah Study Opportunities on the Net. This page provides links to
       both Orthodox and Non-Orthodox locations on the Internet that
       support the study of Torah. This includes web sites, mailing
       lists, and pointers to archive of past study sessions. All
       pointers are extensively annotated.
       (<http://uahcweb.org/torahnet/>)

     * AishDas Society. This is a group committed to the advancement of
       meaningful worship in the Orthodox Jewish community. This page
       provides a weekly publication of selected divrei Torah on the
       parashah from around the Internet (downloadable Microsoft Word
       document). It also provides a Guide to Torah Study Opportunities
       on the net, limited to those with a traditional perspective.
       Orthodox perspective. Uses frames. (<http://aishdas.org/>)

     * Global Jewish Information Network. A reference for all things
       Jewish on the Internet. Includes information on network tools,
       Hebrew in the net, libraries, Email lists, newsgroups, Jewish
       networking, and the Global Jewish Information Network.
       (<http://www.jewishnet.net/>)

     * Shamash: The Jewish Internet Consortium. A central point for
       Jewish Information from a large number of Jewish organizations.
       Also includes a large number of Jewish mailing list archives.
       (<http://www.shamash.org/>)

     * Virtual Jerusalem. Virtual Jerusalem is a user-friendly, regularly
       updated index of "neighborhoods" covering the full spectrum of
       Jewish and Israeli life, including arts and entertainment, science
       and technology, business and finance, religion, politics, travel,
       children and education. (< http://www.virtualjerusalem.com/>)

     * Jewish America. A site with the goal of providing a link between
       those who seek and those who provide Torah / Traditional
       information, products, and services.
       (<http://www.JewishAmerica.com/>)

     * The Ultimate Jewish/Israel Link Launcher. A volunteer-prepared
       collection of over 4,601 links.
       (<http://ucsu.colorado.edu/~jsu/launcher.html>)

     * Jewish Euro Web Link. A comprehensive list of links to Jewish
       websites in Europe, currently more than sixty individual sites in
       18 countries, ranging from newspapers to student groups to
       communal bodies, developed by the European Council of Jewish
       Communities (ECJC). (<http://www.ort.org/ecjc>)
       
   These sites are sponsored by different organizations, so they have
   different info and different flavors. They have Hebrew and English
   bible texts and commentaries, Jewish-oriented software, info on Israel
   and Judaism, and much, much more.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.6: Is SCJ available via a Listserv or other e-mail
         means?

Answer:
   
   At one time, SCJ and S.C.Israel were once available as mailing lists
   through Shamash. However, they were discontinued by the Shamash staff
   about 10 days before Pesach in 1996. The reason for doing this was the
   disproportionate system load. These two lists had a tiny fraction of
   all Shamash subscribers (perhaps 1% or less) but, because of the huge
   amount of traffic on the newsgroups, took as much as half of all
   mailing-list processing time. Because other mailing lists with content
   specific to Shamash were being delayed by the high load on the system,
   these two lists were removed.
   
   With the growth of web access, and the decline (somewhat) of Usenet,
   there has been less interest in gatewaying News to Mail. However, you
   can get access to the groups via the web. Simply go to one of the
   websites that provide public news access, such as Deja (www.deja.com)
   or Mailandnews (www.mailandnews.com).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.7: What divrei Torah are posted to Usenet?

Answer:
   
   There are too many to mention. Many of these used to be posted to
   soc.culture.jewish; it is difficult to determine from the current
   noise in the unmoderated newsgroup whether they are still being posted
   there. There are a large number of traditional D'vrei Torah being
   posted to alt.religion.judaism.orthodox. The list changes so often, it
   cannot reasonably be maintained in the FAQ.
   
   There are also a number of mailing lists available that provide divrei
   Torah on a regular basis. Check the sites mentioned in the list of
   mailing lists (Section 20.3) for appropriate lists.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.8: Where can I find collected divrei Torah?

Answer:
   
   One of the best sites for finding collected divrei Torah is the Torah
   Study Opportunities on the 'Net
   (http://uahc.org/congs/dc/dc001/torahnet/) maintained by Eric Simon.
   Although Eric is Reform, he has a love and an intense interest in
   traditional divrei Torah. This site collects together all Torah and
   Torah study opportunities available on the internet and by Email. It
   provides links to easily join Torah study email lists, provides links
   to collections of divrei Torah, provides a page of links of Torah
   study for children, and much more.
   
   The machine shamash.org contains a Torah discourse collection at the
   URL <http://shamash.org/tanach/tanach.html>, plus archives of various
   Jewish-interest mailing lists. Shamash also provides an awesome index
   search, it is at: <http://www.shamash.org/tanach/search.html>. There
   should also be collections of D'vrei Torah at the sites known for
   originating such commentaries, such as http://www.chabad.org/ and
   http://www.torah.org/.
   
   There is also a free Talmud study course being offered by the net by
   Rabbi Judith Z. Abrams, Ph.D. For more information, see
   http://www.maqom.com/, or write her at: jabrams@maqom.com.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.9: What software is available for Hebrew applications?

Answer:
   
   There are numerous utilities. A good place to start is the Hebrew
   Computing document on www.shamash.org at
   http://www.shamash.org/computers. Another good place to start is to
   search on a meta-search engine such as http://www.dogpile.com/ for
   "Hebrew Software" (or on one of the Jewish search engines).
   
   Some other sources are:

     * Davka Corporation. 7074 N.Western Ave, Chicago IL 60645, USA.
       Within the USA, the following toll-free number may be used: (800)
       621-8227. The following numbers may be used anywhere: FAX (312)
       262-9298; VOICE (312) 465-4070. http://www.davka.com/

     * LEV Software, Inc.; Hebrew Educational Software; 1-800-776-6538;
       lev@netzone.com http://www.levsoftware.com/

     * HebrewSoft. Hebrewsoft has a Hebrew English dictionary and a
       Hebrew tutor. Email: info@hebrewsoft.com. Tel: + 972-4-8346756.
       http://www.hebrewsoft.com/
       
   Jacob Richman also maintains a list of Hebrew Software at
   http://www.cji.co.il/hotsites/j-soft.htm.
   
   If you have suggestions for software to add to this list, please
   contact the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.10: What other Jewish software is available?

Answer:
   
   Again, this ia an area that has seen quick a bit of growth. There is
   now quite a bit of software available. One starting point for a search
   in this area is the Shamash Web Page on computers
   (<http://www.shamash.org/computers/>), which provides a lot of
   information on different sources of software, and includes a
   searchable software archive. Another source are the Jewish Search
   Engines listed in Section 20.4. You can also do a search for "Jewish
   Software" on a meta-search engine such as http://www.dogpile.com/.
   Some other sources are the Jewish Mall
   (http://www.ipol.com/JMALL/SOFTWARE.HTM),
   
   Here are some additional references:

     * Davka (http://www.davka.com/). A manufacturer of a wide variety of
       Jewish software.

     * Dor L'Dor Interactive Judaic Software
       (http://www.radix.net/~dor_l_dor/). Provides software for hands-on
       experiential learning of the Hebrew alphabet and prayers.

     * Lev Software (http://www.levsoftware.com/). A wide variety of
       Hebrew Software

     * The Jewish Software Center (http://users.aol.com/jewishsoft). A
       distributing company distributing Jewish software from 13
       manufacturers.

     * Torah Educational Software (http://www.torahscholar.com/).
       Israel's largest developer and distributor of Judaic educational
       software. Developer and Distributor for ArtScroll Stone Chumash...
       Bar Ilan University... Judaic Encyclopedia... Yad Vashem etc.

     * The Kabbalah Software Catalog. (http://www.kabsoft.com/) Kabbalah
       Software is a producer of high-quality, low-priced Judaic
       software, including Clip-Art, Print Shop products, Fonts,
       reference material, calendar programs, utilities, word processors,
       hebrew utilities, torah study materials, and educational software.

     * Right to Left Software. (http://www.rtlsoft.com/) Manufacturers of
       Hebrew Software.

     * Torah Productions (http://www.torahproductions.com) has two
       products to help students learn Torah and Talmud:

          + Sedra Bytes
            (<http://www.simtel.net/pub/simtelnet/win3/torah/sdrabyts.zip
            >). This is a bible study program that includes each of the
            54 traditional weekly study sections for the Five Books of
            Moses and 51 areas for broad conceptual browsing. The text of
            this Bible study program is 100% interactive. It can be
            modified and edited to suit the user's individual needs and
            religious perspective. With the appropriate software it can
            be used for desktop publishing and multimedia applications
            limited only by the user's skill and imagination. The books
            are beautifully illustrated with unique and original woodcuts
            that capture the essence and spirit of each book.

          + The Torah La-Am Library
            (<http://www.simtel.net/pub/simtelnet/win3/torah/toralaam.zip
            >) This contains the complete set of 105 Sedra Byte books. It
            includes 54 traditional weekly study sections for the Five
            Books of Moses and 51 areas for broad conceptual browsing.
            The library includes an index of 500 subjects and topics and
            a powerful search engine. The library is non-denominational
            and therefore useful to a broad spectrum of people of many
            faiths and religious convictions.

     * Shamash graphic images (http://shamash.org/computers/graphics).

     * Shamash: A wide variety of Hebrew Fonts for a wide variety of
       platforms (http://shamash.org/computers/hebrew-fonts).
       
   Another source is the software store at Jewish.com
   (http://www.jewish.com/store/software.html)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.11: Are there any Jewish Libraries on the Internet?

Answer:
   
   This question is yet another example of how the times have changed.
   When the FAQ stared, there were few libraries on the Internet; the few
   that were available were accessible only via telnet (terminal
   emulation) and VT100 emulation.
   
   Today, there are many libraries on the Internet:

     * University of Haifa Library (http://www-lib.haifa.ac.il)

     * Hebrew University: Jewish National and University Library
       (http://sites.huji.ac.il/jnul/contents.html)

     * Jewish Theological Seminary. (http://www.jtsa.edu/library/)

     * Jewish Public Library (Montreal CANADA)
       (http://www.jewishpubliclibrary.org/)

     * New York Public Library, Jewish Division
       (http://www.nypl.org/research/chss/jws/jewish.html)

     * Haifa Library. (http://www-lib.haifa.ac.il/)

     * Jewish Community Library of Los Angeles (http://www.jclla.org/)

     * Chabad Lubavitch Library. (http://www.chabad.org/library/)

     * Albert and Temmy Latner Jewish Public Library of Toronto, Toronto,
       Ontario, CANADA. (http://webhome.idirect.com/~alephtav/index.htm)
       
   Princeton University maintains a list of Jewish Libraries at
   http://www.princeton.edu/~pressman/libjew.htm. Another source of
   information is the Association of Jewish Libraries (AJL) at
   http://www.jewishlibraries.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.12: I'm interesting in ordering books or music on the
         internet. Where should I look?

Answer:
   
   With the growth of the Internet, there are now many, many, many
   retailers of both secular and Jewish products on the Internet. This
   FAQ cannot claim to list them all; however, we can identify some of
   the largest ones. Note that the FAQ makes no claim as to the quality
   of any of these services. They are likely all good, but the FAQ can
   provide no guarantees.
   
   The line has blurred between book retailers and music retailers. In an
   effort to grow their business, many book retailers stock music and
   videos, and many music retailers stock books.
   
    Secular Services
    
   The following commercial concerns all provide a large selection of
   books and/or music, including a fair selection of Jewish books and/or
   music:

     * Amazon. http://www.amazon.com/

     * Barnes and Noble. http://www.bn.com/

     * CDNow. http://www.cdnow.com/
       
    Jewish Retailers
    
   The following retailers all provide a large selection of Jewish books
   and/or Music:

     * Broders Rare and Used Books. http://www.brodersbooks.com/
       A good sources for the rare or used books, often not stocked by
       other retailers.

     * Jewishmall http://www.jewishmall.com/
       A collection of online Jewish retailers

     * Jewishmusic.Com http://www.jewishmusic.com/
       Operated by Tara Publications. Stocks both books and music.

     * Judaism.Com. http://www.judaism.com/
       Operated by US Judaica, formerly Pinsker's Bookstore in Pittsburgh
       PA. This concern is well known from their land-line number:
       1-800-JUDAISM.

     * J. Levine Books and Judaica. http://www.levinejudaica.com/
       Based out of New York, NY. Sells books, media, and Judaica.

     * My Jewish Books. http://www.myjewishbooks.com/
       An online discount Jewish bookstore. Orders are fulfilled by
       Amazon.com, and proceeds go to tzedakah.

     * Virtual Jerusalem Shops. http://vjshops.virtualjerusalem.com/
       A collection of Judaica shops in a wide variety of categories.
       
    Publishers
    
   The following are publishers of Jewish Music or Jewish texts. You can
   often order directly from them. An additional source of Jewish
   Publishers is the Association of Jewish Book Publishers
   (http://www.avotaynu.com/ajbp.html). There is another list of
   publishers at
   http://www.lights.com/publisher/db/topics-Religion-Jewish.html.
   Additionally, almost all "mainstream" publishing houses, such as Simon
   and Schuster (http://www.simonsays.com/), Macmillan Publishers
   (http://www.macmillan.com/), Doubleday
   (http://www.randomhouse.com/doubleday/, another division of Random
   House), Random House (http://www.randomhouse.com/), Harper Collins
   (http://www.harpercollins.com/hc/), among others, all offer popular
   Judaica in their catalogs.
   
   Some good publishers that focus specifically on Judaica are:

     * Artscroll/Mesorah. http://www.artscroll.com/
       Publishers of timeless Jewish classics, including Talmud
       commentaries.

     * Jacob Aronson Inc. http://www.aronson.com/
       Publishers of Judaica

     * Behrman House. http://www.behrmanhouse.com/
       Behrman House is the leading publisher of Judaica and educational
       materials for Jewish religious schools in North America and in
       English-speaking countries around the world.

     * Ben-Simon Publications. http://www.swifty.com/bensimon/
       Publishes Jewish and family themed books.

     * CCAR Press. http://www.ccarnet.org/press/
       Publishers of liturgical and reference material for the Reform
       movement.

     * Feldheim Publishers. http://www.feldheim.com/aa/index.shtml
       "Bringing you the finest in Torah Literature for the Entire
       Family"

     * Five Star Publications. http://www.fivestarsupport.com
       Various categories including kosher cookbooks, Holocaust memoirs,
       consumer-oriented (Profits of Death, an expose of the funeral
       industry) and children's books.

     * Jewish Lights Publishing. http://www.jewishlights.com/
       Publishers of a large amount of contemporary Jewish thought and
       practice books, including Anita Diamont's stuff.

     * Jewish Publishing Society. http://www.jewishpub.org/
       The oldest publisher of Jewish literature published in the English
       language. Since 1888, JPS has providing titles that further Jewish
       culture and education

     * Jonathan David Press. http://www.jonathandavidonline.com/home.htm
       A New York-based nonfiction trade book publisher that specializes
       in sports, biography, reference, and popular Judaica. The parent
       corporation, Jonathan David Co., Inc., markets and distributes
       Jonathan David publications throughout the world. In addition, it
       issues Judaica Book Guide, a mail-order catalog offering the very
       best in Judaica from the lists of all publishers at bargain
       prices.

     * Kehot Publishing. http://www.kehotonline.com/
       The publishing arm of Chabad.

     * KTAV Publishing Company http://www.ktav.com
       Publisher of fine Jewish books and gifts, including prayer books,
       books for children and young adults, toys, games, school supplies
       and textbooks. KTAV also produces distinguished scholarly books on
       topics ranging from Biblical study to contemporary issues.

     * Milah Press. http://www.milahpress.com/
       Books on the holocaust, Hebrew language, and Zionism.

     * Pelican Publishing Company, Inc. http://pelicanpub.com
       Publishes books of Jewish interest for all ages, including A
       Travel Guide to Jewish Europe, Passover Lite Kosher Cookbook,
       Kosher Cajun Cookbook, Kosher Creole Cookbook, Kosher
       Southern-Style Cookbook, Toby Belfer's Seder: A Passover Story
       Retold, Toby Belfer Never Had a Christmas Tree, and A Belfer Bar
       Mitzvah.

     * The Reconstructionist Press. http://www.jrf.org/pub/listmain.html
       Publishing arm of the Reconstructionist movement. Publishes over
       fifty titles dealing with Reconstructionist philosophy, liturgy,
       education and current issues in daily Jewish life. The press also
       publishes and distributes the works of Mordecai M. Kaplan.

     * Schocken Books.
       http://www.randomhouse.com/knopf/schocken/home.html
       A division of Random House, Schocken is well known for publishing
       scholarly books on a wide variety of Jewish subjects.

     * SHJ Press. http://www.shj.org/gift.html
       The publishing arm of the Society for Humanistic Judaism movement.

     * Soncino Press. http://www.soncino.com/
       Publishers of Judaic classic books.

     * SoundWrite. http://www.soundswrite.com/
       The publisher of Jewish music for a large number of contemporary
       Jewish artists, including Debbie Friedman, Julie Silver, Rabbi Joe
       Black, and others.

     * Targum Press. http://www.targum.com/
       A major publisher of Jewish books. A subsidiary of Feldheim
       Publishers.

     * Torah Aura Productions. http://www.torahaura.com/
       Publishers of Jewish educational material.

     * Transcontinental Music. http://www.uahcweb.org/transmp/
       The music publishing arm of the Reform Movement.

     * UAHC Press. http://www.uahcweb.org/press/
       Publishers of a large amount of material dealing with the Reform
       movement.

     * USCJ Bookstore. http://www.uscj.org/mall/bookservice.htm
       USCJ is the publisher of books for the Conservative movement.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 20.99: Boy, you did a wonderful job on the FAQ? How do I
         show my appreciation?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of ways you can support the FAQ:
    1. Reduce the Noise. You can do your part to reduce the noise on the
       Jewish newsgroups by only posting articles that are on subject and
       contain significant content. Avoid responding to trolls, and try
       to answer questions fairly and impartially.
    2. Help Complete The FAQ. Become part of the support team for
       questions sent to the FAQ; help develop new FAQ sections or
       complete/expand existing ones. Contact the FAQ maintainer at
       maintainer@scjfaq.org for more information.
    3. Provide Financial Support. In the past, the FAQ joked about
       dedicating questions in memory of people. But financial support
       for the maintenance of the FAQ is always appreciated. The FAQ is
       hosted by Shamash (http://www.shamash.org/), the master copy
       (http://master.scjfaq.org) is maintained by the FAQ maintainer on
       Pacificnet (http://www.pacificnet.net). Both of these providers
       have their fees. Additionally, there is the cost of the domain
       name. Donations to support maintenance are always appreciated;
       donations in excess of costs will be donated to Tzedakah. Contact
       the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org or faigin@acm.org for
       more information.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Who Wrote the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   The original version of the Frequently Asked Questions was developed
   by a committee consisting of Mike Allen, Jerry Altzman, Rabbi Charles
   Arian, Jacob Baltuch (Past Chair), Joseph Berry, Warren Burstein,
   Stewart Clamen, Daniel Faigin, Avi Feldblum, Itzhak "Jeff" Finger,
   Gedaliah Friedenberg, Yechezkal Gutfreund, Art Kamlet, Joe Kansun,
   Alan Lustiger, Hillel Markowitz, Len Moskowitz, Colin Naturman, Aliza
   Panitz, Eliot Shimoff, Mark Steinberger, Steven Weintraub, Matthew
   Wiener, and headed by Robert Levene. The organization and structuring
   of the lists for posting purposes was done by Daniel Faigin, who is
   currently maintaining the lists. Other contributors include Aaron
   Biterman, A. Engler Anderson, Ken Arromdee, Seymour Axelrod, Jonathan
   Baker, Josh Backon, Micha Berger, Steven M. Bergson, Eli Birnbaum,
   Kevin Brook, J. Burton, Harvey Cohen, Todd J.Dicker, Michael Dinowitz,
   Rabbi Jim Egolf, Sean Engelson, Mike Fessler, Menachem Glickman,
   Amitai Halevi, Walter Hellman, Miriam Jerris, Robert D. Kaiser, Yosef
   Kazen, Rabbi Jay Lapidus, Mier Lehrer, Heather Luntz, David Maddison,
   Arnaldo Mandel, Ilana Manspeizer, Seth Ness, Chris Newport, Daniel
   Nomy, Jennifer Paquette, Andrew Poe, Alan Pfeffer, Adam Reed, Seth
   Rosenthall, JudithSeid@aol.com, David Sheen, Rabbi John Sherwood,
   Michael Sidlofsky, Michael Slifkin, Frank Smith, Michael Snider, Andy
   Tannenbaum, marktan@aol.com, Meredith Warshaw, Bill Wadlinger, Arel
   Weisberg, Dorothy Werner, and Art Werschulz, and the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting board. Comments and corrections are
   welcome; please address them to maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.09.15 07:33


End of SCJ FAQ Part 11 (Miscellaneous) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:06 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yg-000OVrC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:06 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05101
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:22:00 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id A7CC97A133
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:09 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 07A617A13C
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:07 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28074 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:32 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:32 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032532.28073.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: 12-Kids
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 84752
Lines: 1737

%%%StartText

From: SCJ FAQ Maintainer <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.culture.jewish.parenting,soc.culture.jewish.moderated,news.answers,soc.answers
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions (12/12)
Approved: scjp-board@shamash.org,scjm-approval@scjm.org,news-answers-request@MIT.Edu
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
X-Unique-Key: <faq.kids>
X-Mlj-Command: scj.archive FAQ/12-Kids
URL: http://master.scjfaq.org/faq/
URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/
Summary: Kids and Judaism
Message-ID: <faq.kids_971028422@shell.pacificnet.net>

Archive-name: judaism/FAQ/12-Kids
Soc-culture-jewish-archive-name: faq.12-Kids
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

               Frequently Asked Questions on Soc.Culture.Jewish
		Part 12: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions
                    [Last Post: Sun Oct  8 11:07:12 US/Pacific 2000]

   The FAQ is a collection of documents that is an attempt to answer
   questions that are continually asked on the soc.culture.jewish family
   of newsgroups. It was written by cooperating laypeople from the
   various Judaic movements. You should not make any assumption as to
   accuracy and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In
   all cases, it is always best to consult a competent authority--your
   local rabbi is a good place to start.
   
   [Got Questions?] Hopefully, the FAQ will provide the answer to your
   questions. If it doesn't, please drop Email to questions@scjfaq.org.
   The FAQ maintainer will endeavor to direct your query to an
   appropriate individual that can answer it. If you would like to be
   part of the group to which the maintainer directs questions, please
   drop a note to the FAQ maintainer at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
   
   The deceased sages described within are of blessed memory, (assume a
   Z"L or ZT"L after their names) and the sages alive today should live
   to see long and good days (assume SHLITA). May Hashem grant complete
   recovery to the ill. Individual honorifics are omitted.
   
   The FAQ was produced by a committee and is a cooperative work. The
   contributors never standardized on transliteration scheme from Hebrew,
   Aramaic, Yiddish, or Ladino to English. As a result, the same original
   word might appear with a variety of spellings. This is complicated by
   the fact that there are regional variations in the pronunciation of
   Hebrew. In some places, the common spelling variations are mentioned;
   in others--not. We hope that this is not too confusing.
   
   In general, throughout this FAQ, North American (US/Canada) terms are
   used to refer to the movements of Judaism. Outside of North American,
   Reform is Progressive or Liberal Judaism; Conservative is Masorti or
   Neolog, and Orthodoxy is often just "Judaism". Even with this, there
   are differences in practice, position, and ritual between US/Canada
   Reform and other progressive/liberal movements (such as UK
   Progressive/ Liberal), and between US/Canada Conservative and the
   conservative/Masorti movement elsewhere. Where appropriate, these
   differences will be highlighted.
   
   The goal of the FAQ is to present a balanced view of Judaism; where a
   response is applicable to a particular movement only, this will be
   noted. Unless otherwise noted or implied by the text, all responses
   reflect the traditional viewpoint.
   
   This list should be used in conjunction with the Soc.Culture.Jewish
   reading lists. Similar questions can be found in the books referenced
   in those lists.
   
   There are also numerous other Jewish FAQs available on the Internet
   that are not part of the SCJ FAQ/RL suite. An index to these may be
   found at www.scjfaq.org/otherfaqs.html
   
   This FAQ is a volunteer effort. If you wish to support the maintenance
   of the FAQ, please see Section 20, Question 99 for more information.

     Special Introduction to the Jewish Childrearing Portion of the FAQ
                                      
   This FAQ is intended to serve two newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish and
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting. The latter group will recieve only the
   Jewish Childrearing Portion of the FAQ. Readers with non-childrearing
   questions about Judaism should consult the first part of the
   soc.culture.jewish FAQ, available at http://www.scjfaq.org/faq/.
   
   Answers to general childrearing questions may be found in the
   misc.kids.info FAQs, posted on a regular basis to misc.kids.info.

   Reproduction of this posting for commercial use is subject to
   restriction. See Part 1 for more details.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: ORGANIZATION

   This portion of the FAQ contains answers to the following questions:


     * Introduction to the Jewish Childrearing FAQ
       
    1. Entering the Covenant 
         1. What is circumcision? 
         2. Why are Jewish boys circumcised? 
         3. Who performs the circumcision? 
         4. When is the circumcision done? 
         5. But doesn't it hurt? 
         6. But shouldn't the child make its own decision? 
         7. But circumcision is only required for boys. What about girls?
         8. What are our options for welcoming our new baby girl?
         9. Can we hold a welcoming ceremony on the 8th day for a girl?
        10. What is a pidyon haben?
        11. When is a pidyon haben required?
        12. What about babies who are stillborn or die shortly after
            birth with respect to pidyon haben?
        13. What about an adopted child?
        14. Does Judaism have a tradition of Godparents?
    2. Naming 
         1. What are the Ashkenazi customs regarding the naming of
            children?
         2. But my grandmother was named (insert old-fashioned out of use
            name here? No one uses that name today? How do I name after
            that relative?
         3. Is it appropriate to name a child after a relative of the
            opposite sex?
         4. Is it appropriate for multiple children (i.e. cousins) to be
            named after the same relative?
         5. My spouse has a living relative with the same name as my
            deceased relative. Can we name our children after my
            relative?
         6. What are the Sephardi customs regarding the naming of
            children?
         7. What about babies who are stillborn or die shortly after
            birth?
         8. Are there any distinctly non-Jewish names?
    3. Playtime 
         1. Can I let my kid swim on Shabbat?
         2. Can I let my kid play in the sandbox on Shabbat?
         3. Can children play sports such as Soccer on Shabbat?
         4. What is appropriate dress for swimming?
         5. Can my kid play with Playdough during Pesach?
    4. Eating 
         1. Where can I find kosher baby food?
         2. Where can I find kosher for passover baby food?
    5. Holidays 
         1. What are good activities for children for the major Jewish
            holidays?
    6. Schooling 
         1. How do I determine the right type of religious program: day
            school vs. afterschool?
    7. B'nai Mitzvah 
         1. What is a bar/bat mitzvah?
         2. What's a good gift for a b'nai mitzvah?
         3. What is appropriate dress to wear to the b'nai mitzvah
            ceremony?
         4. What are the characteristics of a good b'nai mitzvah program?
         5. How do I select a good b'nai mitzvah tutor?
    8. Other childhood lifecycle rituals 
         1. I've heard of a ceremony called "Consecration". What is it?
         2. I've heard of a ceremony called "Confirmation". What is it?
    9. Coping with other religions 
         1. My child says all of his friends have Christmas Trees, and he
            wants one too. What do I say?
         2. My child's non-Jewish grandparents have asked her to help
            trim the tree. What do I do?
         3. My child has been invited to an Easter Egg roll? What do I
            do?
         4. My child has been invited to the Easter Egg roll on the White
            House lawn? What do I do?
   10. Growing Older 
         1. My child wants to start dating? How do I ensure proper
            behavior?
         2. My child wants a tattoo. What forms of body modification are
            allowed? Tattoos? Earrings? 
   11. Resource References 
         1. I need some information on Jewish Genetic Diseases. Where do
            I start? 
         2. Are there any recommended online resources on Jewish
            Childrearing or specifically for Jewish children?
       

     * Special Credits for the Jewish Childrearing FAQ 


------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.1: Entering the Covenant: What is circumcision?

Answer:
   
   Circumcision is the removal of the foreskin of the penis.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.2: Entering the Covenant: Why are Jewish boys
         circumcised?

Answer:
   
   The rite of circumcision is one of the most ancient practices of
   Judaism. The commandment to circumcise male children was given to
   Abraham in the Torah (Genesis 17:7-14) [English translation from 1917
   JPS Tanach]:
   
     And God said unto Abraham: 'And as for thee, thou shalt keep My
     covenant, thou, and thy seed after thee throughout their
     generations. This is My covenant, which ye shall keep, between Me
     and you and thy seed after thee: every male among you shall be
     circumcised. And ye shall be circumcised in the flesh of your
     foreskin; and it shall be a token of a covenant betwixt Me and you.
     And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every
     male throughout your generations, he that is born in the house, or
     bought with money of any foreigner, that is not of thy seed. He
     that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money,
     must needs be circumcised; and My covenant shall be in your flesh
     for an everlasting covenant. And the uncircumcised male who is not
     circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that should shall be cut
     off from his people; he hath broken My covenant.
     
   It is repeated in the Torah in Leviticus 12:3, and has remained
   throughout history as one of the most important commandments. It has
   already led to martyrdom in Maccabean times (I Macc. 1:48,60).
   
   Circumcision is (in general) a common denominator among movements:
   Reform, Conservative, Reconstructionist, Orthodox--all circumcise
   their male children and require male converts to undergo some form of
   circumcision.
   
   Furthermore, faith is the only reason that Jews should circumcise
   their male children. In Moreh Nevuchim (Guide for the Pereplexed),
   chapter 49, the Rambam says: "No one, however, should circumcise
   himself or his son for any other reason than pure faith; for
   circumcision is not like an incision on the leg or a burn on the arm,
   but a very difficult operation."
   
   Current medical fashions play no role in circumcision, as it is a
   religous rite to Jews. Thus, it is pointless to attempt to argue for
   or against circumcision from a basis of medical need.
   
   As said in the Reform Responsa addressing circumcision: "Circumcision
   remains for us an essential sign of the covenant. We have affirmed it
   since the days of Abraham, our Father, and continue to affirm it".

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.3: Entering the Covenant: Who performs the
         circumcision?

Answer:
   
   Although some modern Reform Jews use medical doctors to perform the
   circumcision, this is not the traditional method. Traditionally, the
   male infants are circumcised in the home or the shul on the eighth day
   after birth, surrounded by family and friends, and held by the sandek
   (an adult being honored by the parents, often a grandfather). The
   infant is given a little wine, and the ritual is performed by a
   specially trained Mohel, whose sole function is to perform
   circumcisions.
   
   Traditionally, the father is supposed to perform the Brit. As most
   fathers do not have the appropriate training, a Mohel performs the
   Brit. It is customary, that if possible, a Mohel will perform his
   first Brit on his own son - under the supervision of an experienced
   accredited Mohel (his teacher).
   
   Note that Mohelim are not unique to the more traditional Orthodox
   movement. The Reform and Conservative movements also train and
   accredit Mohelim; often, the Mohel is a practicing M.D. (For example,
   Dr. Samuel Kunin (a Reform Mohel in Los Angeles CA) and Dr. Robert
   Lewis (a Conservative Mohel in Columbus OH) are practicing
   urologists).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.4: Entering the Covenant: When is the circumcision
         done?

Answer:
   
   The circumcision is done the eighth day after birth, unless ill health
   or serious medical problems prevent it. Even Shabbat does not stop a
   Bris. If such a child is not circumcised, he is nevertheless
   considered a Jew [San. 44a; Hoffmann, Melamed Leho-il, Yoreh De-a,
   #79]. However, if there are no medical contraindications (e.g.
   hemophilia), it is incumbent for the individual to arrange for their
   circumcision when medically safe to do so.
   
   There are quite a few customs associated with circumcisions:

     * In the Ashkenazi community, on the Shabbat night (Friday night)
       prior to the Brit, the community comes to the home of the newborn
       to welcome him with singing and thanksgiving to Hashem on his
       birth, and a small meal is served including chickpeas (ar'bes).
       These are served as a sign of mourning: the child mourns that the
       angel caused him to forget everything he learned in his mother's
       womb (just one explanation of many for this custom of eating
       chickpeas).

     * In Sephardi communities, the night before the Brit is called the
       night of "Brit Yitzchak" and the community and family gather to
       learn the "Zohar" together, to sing special songs and have a
       dinner. In many places people from the community and family get
       together and study all night not only on the night before the
       brit, but also during the preceding week.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.5: Entering the Covenant: But doesn't it
         [circumcision] hurt?

Answer:
   
   The requirement is that it be done at the eighth day. The Rambam (just
   beyond the section previously quoted) says that earlier the baby is
   too tender and later the father might not be able to bring himself to
   do it. Some doctors have said that after, the baby develops too much
   and would actually be a more serious matter.
   
   With adults, the question is different. After the eighth day the
   nervous system becomes more developed (especially after puberty). For
   adults, a local anesthetic is used (often a mixture of lidocain and
   prilocaine). It is spread on the area, some time is allowed to pass,
   and the procedure is performed with no pain.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.6: Entering the Covenant: But shouldn't the child make
         its own decision [regarding circumcision]?

Answer:
   
   Parents routinely make many decisions for their children; bringing a
   child up to practice a religion is only one of many such.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.7: Entering the Covenant: But circumcision is only
         required for boys. What about girls?

Answer:
   
   Judaism does not practice female circumcision. However, there are many
   traditions that have arise related to the birth of a girl:
   

     * Commonly, girls are welcomed into the convanent through a naming
       ceremony, held in the synagogue.

     * Among Bucharan Jews when the father of the newborn girl is called
       to the Torah for the naming the congregation sing the song "Dror
       Ykra L'ven im Bat" in which each line ends with the word "bat".
       After the reading of the portion and the naming, candies are
       showered on the father and the congregation calls "Mazal Tov".

     * Many Sephardim have a party where they repeat the naming. A Cohen
       is invited and he holds the baby and blesses her with the "Birkat
       Cohanim". Fruit which Israel was blessed for them are served, and
       the Rabbi of the community holds the baby girl on his knees and
       says the words from the Song of Songs "Yonati Bechagvei Haselah"
       (2:14): The ceremony is called "Zeved Ha'bat". The word Zeved
       means gift and comes from Berayshit 30:20 where Leah said at the
       birth of Zevulun "Hashem gave me a good present" and then she gave
       birth to Dina.
       
   The more liberal movements have developed other ceremonies. There is
   an excellent book on the subject by Anita Diamant. Another good
   reference is Lifecycles Volume 1 : Jewish Women on Life Passages and
   Personal Milestones, which includes material from Reform,
   Conservative, Orthodox and Reconstructionist contributors. It was
   edited by Debra Orenstein, and is available from Jewish Lights
   Publications in Vermont.
   
   The Simchat Bat/ Brit Bat / Brit HaHayim is increasingly appearing in
   Modern Orthodoxy has well. A Simchat Bat ceremony is now in the
   Rabbinical Council of America's [Orthodox] Rabbi's manual. This
   ceremony is based on traditional Jewish forms.
   
   The Rabbinical Assembly [Conservative] has included the Simchat Bat
   rite in its new rabbi's manual. As the ceremony is still evolving, the
   RA's manual presents, within a common religious ceremony, three
   options that parents may choose to perform: (A) Lighting seven candles
   (symbolizing the seven days of creation) and holding the baby towards
   them; (B) Wrapping the baby in the four corners of a tallit; (C)
   Lifting the baby and touching her hands to a Torah scroll. A detailed
   article on this topic can be found at:
   http://www.bnaibrith.org/ijm/articles/thnkhvn/.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.8: Entering the Covenant: What are our options for
         welcoming our new baby girl?

Answer:
   
   A number of options are available. Traditionally, a baby girl is named
   the first time the father attends synagogue after the birth. In some
   communities, the mother recites a blessing of gratitude for her health
   and well-being after childbirth; and the father is called to the
   Torah. In other communities, there are more elaborate ceremonies. In
   the Sephardi communities of Turkey and the Balkans, infants are
   clothed in elaborate dress and jewelry. The ceremony has no fixed
   date, but is usually held sometime between seven and thirty days after
   birth, and is conducted by a rabbi, usually at home but sometimes in
   the synagogue. Several central Asian Jewish communities celebrate the
   first time an infant girl is laid in her cradle. In Bokhara, for
   example, small children are called to participate in snatching away
   the sweet treats that have been placed around the baby in the cradle.
   In the Bene Israel community in India, the naming ceremony usually
   takes place on the twelfth day after a girl is born. Held in the home,
   the ritual is intended primarily for the women and children of the
   family. A special new garment is sewn for the child, and her cradle,
   decorated with flowers and colored paper, is placed in the middle of
   the house. Cooked chickpeas, peeled pieces of coconut, and cookies are
   arranged along the inner edges of the cradle. In the Yishuv HaYashan
   (the community of Ashkenazic Jews who settled in Jerusalem beginning
   in 1811), the celebration took place on the eighth day, and the baby
   girl's ears were pierced. [Thanks to http://www.mispacha.org/ for the
   information about ceremonies in other communities.]
   
   In liberal congregations, a number of new ceremonies have been
   developed to symbolically parallel the brit ceremony; these new
   ceremonies serve to welcome the infant into the convenant of Judaism.
   
   There are a number of approaches to these berit ceremonies. Some are
   based on the ceremonial washing of the infant's feet, based on Sarah
   washing the feet of Abraham. Others involve the use of seven
   blessings, paralleling the seven blessings of the wedding ceremony. A
   good source of ideas for such ceremonies is Anita Diamant's The New
   Jewish Baby Book: Names, Ceremonies & Customs, A Guide For Today's
   Families; another is Zeved HaBat by Aryeh Cohen (ISBN 965-264-049-2).
   
   These ceremonies usually take place in the home, anywhere between 7
   days and 30 days after the birth of the daughter. In Israel, they are
   often held in a hall, as the whole family and most of the community is
   invited. There is often a public naming at the synagogue approximately
   30 days after the birth of the infant.
   
   In terms of other resources for such ceremonies, the following have
   been suggested. If you are aware of others to add to this list, please
   let the FAQ maintainer know.

     * The Women's League for Conservative Judaism puts out a whole
       package of information on the Simchat Bat ceremony. Contact them
       at: 48 E. 74th St., NY, NY 10021; 800/628-5083, 212/628-1600 or
       fax 212/772-3507. There is a charge for the package.

     * The ceremony the FAQ maintainer used for his daughter, Erin, is
       available through the autoretriever in PostScript format. To
       receive a uuencoded zip of the ceremony, send the command "send
       infofiles liturgy/britbat.uue" to archives@mljewish.org. You can
       do this through the web by visiting
       http://www.mljewish.org/bin/mrj.if-reqform.cgi.

     * Zeved HaBat, by Aryeh Cohen. ISBN 965-264-049-2.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.9: Entering the Covenant: Can we hold a welcoming
         ceremony on the 8th day for a girl?

Answer:
   
   Traditionally, when a baby girl is born, the father notifies the
   synagogue officials of her arrival and of his plans to have her named
   at a service. Though the baby is not brought to the service, the child
   is named in the synagogue during the reading of the Torah on the
   Shabbat, Monday, or Thursday immediately following her birth.
   Sometimes the date is postponed so that the mother may be present.
   Typically, the father is also honored with an aliyah.
   
   The Conservative movement has no rule on whether or not the 8th day is
   a necessary day to hold the ceremony on for girls. The Conservative
   movement does encourage parents to hold a Simchat Bat for baby girls,
   and to view it as having the same importance as a Brit Milah for boys
   (see Moreh Derekh: The Rabbinical Assembly Rabbi's Manual"). More info
   is available from: "Jewish baby law"
   (http://www.uscj.org/scripts/uscj/paper/Article.asp?ArticleID=271)
   
   However, just because there is nothing "official" doesn't mean you
   can't use an established welcoming ceremony or create your own at any
   time. Baby girls are just as welcome in Jewish tradition as boys are,
   and there are marvellous ways, in every denomination, of showing them
   they are equally loved.
   
   Note: The Reform movement has a number of ceremonies written and
   available through the Reform rabbinate; UAHC publishes Bat Brit
   certificates.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.10: Entering the Covenant: What is a pidyon haben?

Answer:
   
   Pidyon ha-ben is a ceremony that recognizes the first born male child
   (to be specific, the first born male child that was born naturally).
   The ceremony arose due to the special status of the firstborn in
   biblical society. The firstborn received a double portion of his
   father's estate; the last plague in Egypt killed the firstborn--except
   for the firstborn of Israel. Traditionally, the firstborn of Israel
   were consecrated to service to G-d. The bible commands "sanctify unto
   Me all the first-born (Exodus 13:1). This has been interpreted to mean
   that a father was either to dedicate his first-born son to the service
   of the Holy Temple, or to redeem him by paying five schkels
   (approximately five dollars) to a kohen. Noet that this ceremony does
   not apply when either the father or the mother is of a priestly or
   Levite family.
   
   The Pidyon haben ceremony takes place on the thirty-first day after
   birth. For the occasion, a kohen is specially invited to the house.
   The baby is placed on a cushion, and in the presence of assembled
   friends and family, placed on a table. Five silver dollars are laid
   beside him. In the presence of those assembled, an ancient dialoge
   takes place betwen the father and the kohen. Sometimes there are
   additional English readings, and some ceremonies include participation
   by the mother. The kohen usually gives the "redemption money" to
   tzedahkah.
   
   Pidyon haben is observed in traditional communities, and in the
   Conservative community. It tends not to be observed in Reform
   movement.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.11: Entering the Covenant: When is a pidyon haben
         required?

Answer:
   
   A pidyon haben is required on the 31st (although check with your
   Rabbi, for one source says 30th) day after the birth of a first born
   male child. This child must be an "opener of the womb". That is, a
   male child born naturally (not a caesarian) and not preceded in any
   way by another child.
   
   Note that if the father is a Levite or a kohen, (making the child a
   Levi or a kohen) the pidyon haben does not apply (logically since the
   father could wind up paying himself). If the mother is the daughter of
   a Levi or a kohen the child is exempt.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.12: Entering the Covenant: What about babies who are
         stillborn or die shortly after birth with respect to pidyon haben?

Answer:
   
   A child who dies before the month is up could not have become subject
   to pidyon haben. However, if it was a natural birth, it is an "opener
   of the womb", and any subsequent child would not be subject to pidyon
   haben.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.13: Entering the Covenant: What about an adopted
         child?

Answer:
   
   An adopted child is treated according to the status of the natural
   parents (assuming that they are Jewish). If the adopted child has been
   converted, pidyon haben does not apply. Baby girls should be named in
   the synagogue; baby boys should be circumcised at the appropriate
   time. If the adopted boy is more than 8 days old and has not been
   circumcised, they should undergo the surgery as soon as it is legally
   and medically permissable. If the child has been circumcized without
   the appropriate ritual, your rabbi should be consulted as to the
   appropriate manner of initiating the child into the community of
   Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.1.14: Entering the Covenant: Does Judaism have a
         tradition of Godparents?

Answer:
   
   Among some Sephardi communities it is customary for the Sandek (who
   holds the child during the brit) to buy the clothing, blankets and
   diapers for the baby. In all communities, the role of Sandek is
   considered a great honor. However, the notion of Godparent in the
   western sense is not a Jewish notion; it is derived from the Christian
   godparent, whose charge is to ensure the child's spritual upbringing
   in the church.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.1: Naming: What are the Ashkenazi customs regarding
         the naming of children?

Answer:
   
   In Judaism, one's name has always been considered to be extremely
   important. As names were bestowed, the meaning of the name was the
   prime consideration of its selection. The name often imbodied
   characteristics that the parents wished the infant to have, or
   experiences surrounding the birth, or the look of the infant.
   
   Many naming traditions in Judaism arose out of custom, and this custom
   often arose out of superstition. This was often based on a close
   association between the name and the person. From this arose a common
   belief that the changing of a name would prevent the evil spirit from
   harming the person. If the name were changed, the evil spirit would
   not recognize the person. This belief is embodied in the Talmud (Rosh
   Hashanah 16b): "Four things can abrogate the decreee of man and they
   are: charity, supplication, change of name, and change of action."
   
   These customs carried over in Eastern Europe to the naming of
   children. In Poland, when several people have died in a family, a
   new-born child is given a name that is never uttered, so as not to
   give the evil spirit any opportunity. Often, a nickname was given to
   the child, such as "Alte" (Old One), Chaim (Life), or Zaida
   (Grandfather). This was a way of deceiving the angel of death. A
   similar practice was done for the extremely ill, changing the
   individual's name to deceive the angel of death.
   
   In Ashkenazi Judaism, the custom arose to name a child after a
   deceased relative. Infants were not named after the living, because
   the angel of death might mistake the infant for the adult, and take
   the wrong one. Some felt that to name after a living relative might be
   to rob the adult of their soul, as the name was tied very closely to
   the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.2: Naming: But my grandmother was named (insert old-
         fashioned out of use name here)? No one uses that name today? How do
         I name after that relative?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different approachs. Some take the first letter
   of the relatives name, and choose a different name beginning with the
   same letter. Unfortunately, this loses the original meaning of the
   name. Others choose an arbitrary English name, but retain the
   relative's Hebrew name. Kolach recommends choosing an English name
   with the name meaning as the Hebrew name. Consider the English name of
   Mildred. Mildred is either from the Latin, meaning "Sweet Singer", or
   from the Teutonic, meaning "Strength". It has Hebrew equivalents of
   Amtzaw, Gavreelaw, N'eemaw, Neevaw, Reenaw, Sheeraw, and T'heelaw.
   Thus, less-dated English equivalents might be Shira (Song), Valerie
   (Strong), Gabrielle (God is my Strength), Renana (Joy or Song), or
   Carol (Melody or Song).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.3: Naming: Is it appropriate to name a child after a
         relative of the opposite sex?

Answer:
   
   Yes. However, you may run into some difficulty, depending on the name.
   Only a few Hebrew names are easily adaptable, such as Simhah (Joy),
   which can be used for either a boy or a girl. More often than not, you
   will have to look for a name with an allied meaning, or even merely a
   similar sound.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.4: Naming: Is it appropriate for multiple children
         (i.e. cousins) to be named after the same relative?

Answer:
   
   Yes. Note that many Sephardi families consider it a sign of blessing
   there are many grandchildren named after them (during their lifetime).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.5: Naming: My spouse has a living relative with the
         same name as my deceased relative. Can we name our children after my
         relative?

Answer:
   
   Note that this response is significant only to those that hold with
   Ashkenazi traditions; Sephardi traditions name after living relatives.
   Also note that we are dealing with custom here; there is no formal law
   that would prohibit it. Ashkenazic custom discourages naming a baby
   after a living relative. This is a based on a folk-myth that this
   might confuse the Angel of Death, who might then accidentally take the
   baby instead of the older relative. Sefardic custom has no such
   tradition, and thus encourages parents to name their children after
   living relatives. Generally, Ashkenazi Jews should follow the
   traditional Ashkenazi custom, and Sefardic Jews should follow the
   Sefardic custom, but the end decision is left to the parents.
   
   For the most part, most people would not use the same name. Often, the
   living relative with that name would be offended that one might be
   trying to use the name before they were done with it! However, as with
   anything, there are solutions. Consider using a less recognizable
   variant of the name, or a name with the same first letter, instead.
   Another approach would be to use a name that is different, but has the
   same meaning. There also appears to be less of a taboo against using
   English names of living relatives (i.e., use the English name, but use
   a different Hebrew name). However, the best approach is to check with
   the living relative to see if they would be offended.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.6: Naming: What are the Sephardi customs regarding the
         naming of children?

Answer:
   
   Sephardic Jews have the opposite custom from the Ashkenazi. In
   Sephardi tradition, one customarily names an infant after a living
   relative, usually its living grandparents.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.2.7: Naming: What about babies who are stillborn or die
         shortly after birth?

Answer:

     * Orthodoxy: Traditional Jewish law is that if a child dies before
       reaching the age of 30 days, no formal burial is required. Such a
       child is considered a nefel, and for such a child, no burial and
       no mourning rites are required (Ket. 20b; Shab. 135b; Evel Rabati
       I; etc.) The Shulhan Arukah addresses whether a eulogy is
       permitted; it says for the children of the poor, it may be done
       from the age of five and onward; and for the children of the rich,
       from six and onward (M.K. 24b; Shulhan Arukh 344.4). This shows
       that, traditionally, little was made of infant deaths. Further, a
       nefel was treated as an amputated limb, and buried in the general
       section of the cemetary (Ket. 20b) to avoid ritual uncleanliness
       for the priests (M. Edut 6.3; Yad Hil. Tumat Hamet 2.3; Pahad
       Yitzhaq, Ever). Note that, strictly speaking, it was not necessary
       to bury amputated limbs (Shulhan Arukh, Yoreh Deah #209).
       It's very easy to think of the traditional position as
       "heartless." When you've lost a baby and need to grieve, it's
       natural that you'd want to do it in the way you're familiar with.
       Orthodox families in this situation are usually forced to look for
       alternative ways of coming to terms with their grief, since in
       most cases, the traditional funeral and mourning periods are not
       observed. This doesn't mean that nothing has happened, or that as
       far as Judaism is concerned, they have not experienced a loss.
       They still need consolation and any compassionate Orthodox rabbi
       and community will recognize this and do their utmost to help the
       family through their time of pain.

     * Conservative: Four papers have been validated by the Conservative
       movement's Commitee on Jewish law and Standards on this issue.
       Conservative Judaism affirms that where Jewish law allows for more
       than one possible position, a congregation should follow the
       ruling of its rabbi, who as mara d'atra [halakhic authority] has
       the sole responsibility and authority in his/her community for
       making a p'sak [ruling/decision]. The significant teshuvot are
       summarized below:
         1. Rabbi Isidoro Aizenberg, 1987. (a) When a full-grown,
            full-term baby dies within 30 days after birth, there is
            aniut, keriah, burial, shivah and shiloshim; no eulogy is
            delivered and the burial is peformed by the immediate family
            members. If the parents wish, they may recite the kaddish for
            30 days. (b) If the baby was born prematurely, the above
            customs should be practiced only if it died more than 30 days
            after its birth. (c) If the baby was born prematurely and
            died before 30 days are over, the baby should be treated as a
            fetus. There is burial, but no other rituals are practiced.
            In all 3 cases, should parents ask the rabbi if they may
            recite the kaddish, their request should not be denied. This
            teshuva can obtained from the CJLS by one's local
            Conservative rabbi. (II)
         2. Rabbi Debra Reed Blank - teshuva on miscarriage. She agrees
            with the first teshuva for the case of a full-term baby dying
            within 30 days after birth. For cases when the fetus was not
            born alive, full mourning rites are not called for or
            appropriate, for that would compromise the position of
            classical Judaism on the legitimacy of abortion in some
            circumstances. However, in event of a miscarriage the
            community should tend to both members of the couple under the
            rubric of bikur holim (visiting the sick), for they are
            suffering from the loss of the child that they were expecting
            to have. The couple may recite the kaddish if they choose.
            This teshuva can obtained from the CJLS by one's local
            Conservative rabbi.
         3. Rabbi Stephanie Dickstein, 1999. In an extension and revision
            of her 1992 paper, she also agrees with the first teshuva for
            the case of a full-term baby dying within 30 days after
            birth. For cases when the fetus was not born alive, she holds
            that burial in a Jewish cemetery is required for stillbirths,
            and she recommends a funeral service. The stillborn may be
            named and circumcision can, but need not, be done. The grave
            should be marked later. After the first day, the parents may
            observe the practices associated with shiva b'tzniut (private
            observances which do not involve the community). This teshuva
            is online at
            http://learn.jtsa.edu/topics/diduknow/responsa/hatesh_confron
            t.shtml
       Additionally, Conservative/Liberal Jewish responses to these
       situations can be found in Nina Beth Cardin's "Tears of Sorrow,
       Seeds of Hope: A Jewish Spiritual Companion for Infertility and
       Pregnancy Loss" (Woodstock, VT: Jewish Lights, 1999).

     * Reform: Reform believes that times have changed from the days of
       the large family and common infant deaths of tradition. This has
       made all events in a child's life more significant and magnified.
       Thsi includes the tragic death of a yong child, a still-birth, or
       a miscarriage. A responsa issued in 1983 (Contemporary American
       Reform Responsa #106) suggests that there be a simple burial for a
       still-born infant or a child who dies at an early age. This
       provides a way for the family to overcome its grief. It indicates
       that a miscarriage may, however, be disposed of by the hospital or
       clinic in accordance with its usual procedures. Not burial is
       necessary in such a case, but it is not prohibited either. They do
       suggest burial for infants, and possibly for still-births.
       Personal autonomy allows laypeople and rabbis to observe or not
       observe as they see fit.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Are there any distinctly non-Jewish names?

   Yes. There are a number:
   
   Natalie
          Christmas Child
          
   Dolores
          Sorrow of the mother of our lord
          
   Noel
          Christmas
          
   Christopher
          Christbearer
          
   However, even such names are not always clear. For example, in Israel,
   "Natali" is considered a Hebrew name , meaning "my plant, etc." (or
   literally, "it was planted to me").

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.3.1: Playtime: Can I let my kid swim on Shabbat?

Answer:
   
   There are two documented concerns for traditional Jews. First, the
   Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chaiim 326:7) discusses washing (presumably for
   hygienic reasons) in a river, and permits it provided that the person
   dry him/herself completely before walking four amot in a karmelit
   (i.e., the banks of the river). The Mishna Brurah (loc cit., note 21)
   points out that other (later?) authorities have ruled against washing
   in a river on Shabbat, because of the possible wringing out of the
   towel (an av m'lakha -- major category of activity forbidden on
   Shabbat). Hence, there appears to be concern about wringing out a
   towel after swimming.
   
   More directly, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chaiim 339:2) rules against
   swimming (recreational?) in a pool on Shabbat, on the grounds that a
   person might make a "havit shel sha'yatin" (raft, float), and that
   swimming might force water out of the pool and outside the eruv. But
   if there is a rim around the pool (so that there is no possibility of
   water spilling over the edge), there is also no concern that the
   swimmer will make a raft or float.
   
   There are also some other potential violations, but these are the two
   clearly documented ones.
   
   To Conservative Jews, this concern is not relevent today; when
   swimmers wish to use such devices in modern society, they purchase
   them ahead of time, and do not actually build one on the beach.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.3.2: Playtime: Can I let my kid play in the sandbox on
         Shabbat?

Answer:
   
   For traditional Jews, there are some aspects of sandbox play that
   cross into traditionally prohibited activities for Shabbat, such as
   straining, constructing, or digging. Although young children need not
   be prevented from engaging in these activities, parents should not
   encourage them to do it. As the child gets older, they can be taught
   about the prohibited activities.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.3.3: Playtime: Can children play sports such as Soccer
         on Shabbat?

Answer:
   
   The Shulkhan Arukh (Orach Chaiim 343) provides a general guideline for
   raising children in an obervant home: As soon as a child is educable,
   the parents should teach the child about observance. Thus, even a
   three-year old (who, as a halakhic minor is not obligated to observe
   Shabbat) should be taught the relevant rudiments of Shabbat
   observance. This does not mean that the parent must take away a rattle
   or battery-powered toy, but it does mean that, on Shabbat, the child
   should be encouraged to play Shabbat-appropriate games. The R'ma and
   the Mishna Brurah (loc. cit.) point out that, by the time a child
   understands what Shabbat is (e.g., certainly by age 8), the child
   should be avoiding blatant Shabbat violation. The Shulkan Arukh's
   standard thus does not see the age of majority (13 for boys, 12 for
   girls) as a threshold for observance, and does not permit Shabbat
   violation by "educable" children (i.e., children above the age of 8 or
   so).
   
   In addition to the standard 39 classes of activities ("m'lakhot")
   forbidden on Shabbat, there is a prohibition against activities that
   are inconsistent with the spirit of Shabbat. The Ramban, for example,
   suggests that the obligation to "rest" ("shvita") on Shabbat is, in
   fact, biblical; it is in any event certainly a major rabbinic
   obligation.
   
   Thus, there are two general principles: Begin with Shabbat-appropriate
   games and play as early as is practical, and encourage Shabbat-
   appropriate activity, rather than Shabbat-inappropriate activity (even
   if such activity does not inherently violate Shabbat).
   
   What kinds of games and play are Shabbat-appropriate? Certainly
   activities with substantial Jewish content (e.g., board games with
   Jewish themes, available from many Jewish bookstores). Family
   activities should also be encouraged; reading stories, reviewing
   relevant parts of the weekly Torah portion, etc. Friday night bed-time
   can become a special occasion for hearing stories of "when Grandpa was
   young," or Chelm stories, or stories about SuperJew. When done
   appropriately, children see Shabbat as a special treat, not as a day
   when "we don't do these things."
   
   Some children's games [e.g., those involving explicit violations of
   halakha, such as games involving writing] are clearly inappropriate
   for Shabbat in an observant Orthodox or Conservative family. There is
   nothing wrong with saying "No, we do not paint on Shabbat." But it is
   educationally a much sounder practice to say "We don't ride bikes on
   Shabbat, but we do hear stories about Curious George going to shul."
   
   In some cases, the question of whether a particular activity is
   permissible on Shabbat requires halakhic expertise, and a rabbi should
   be consulted. For example, Conservative authorities permit swimming on
   Shabbat; most Orthodox authorities do not.
   
   Note that some Orthodox authorities rule that ball-playing is
   technically allowed within an eruv, based on the OH 306:45 and the
   Rama's gloss and the Mishneh Berurah's note on this. However, this is
   widely discouraged by rabbis as not being in the spirit of Shabbat.
   
   Rabbi Neuwirth's Shmirat Shabbat k'Hilkhata states that playing ball
   on Shabbat is okay for children, provided that it is within the eruv
   and on artificial surfaces. The reason for this is that Orthodox
   authorities feel that compacting dirt is a violation of a melakha
   (forbidden Shabbat activity); thus the restriction to hard surfaces.
   However, this should be checked with a local rabbi to determine
   whether it is appropriate for your particular community; don't assume
   beforehand that it is.
   
   For those that follow Conservative practice, in "A Guide to Jewish
   Religious Practice", Rabbi Issac Klein rules that some ball playing is
   allowed on Shabbat, based on the Rama on OH 308:45, as long as we
   distinguish between commercialized sports and activities one indulges
   in for personal enjoyment. Commercialized sports and amusements are
   obviously not reccomended because of the many violations of the
   Sabbath that are involved. Individual sports and amusements in
   themselves, where no other violation of the Sabbath is involved, are
   permissible. Again, a key aspect is that one should avoid
   participating in such activities to the point of overexertion and
   fatigue, which would make the act not in the spirit of the Sabbath."
   
   Hence, as a general principle, the best policy would be to give
   children lots of experience with Shabbat as a day for enjoyable
   Shabbat-appropriate activities, either synagogue- or family-centered.
   The emphasis should be on "shabbat-appropriate" activities.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.3.4: Playtime: What is appropriate dress for swimming?

Answer:
   
   For girls, pink and frilly. For boys, anything that puffs up
   enormously around their waist the second they get into the water. :-)
   
   But seriously, this would depend how the family felt in general about
   modesty. There are few exceptions for swimming, and the families who
   are most careful about this even with young girls will not allow them
   to swim in mixed groups if they are dressed "immodestly." Also, some
   men and boys will not go out with their chests uncovered.
   
   The extent to which modesty is a concern depends both on the movement
   and the individual (some people are more modest than others). The more
   Orthodox a movement is, the greater the concern about modesty in
   swimming attire. Hence, it is difficult to give a broad rule. In
   general, especially revealing bathing suits, such as bikinis and
   thongs, are probably inappropriate (unless covered). Similarly, men
   should wear boxer-style trunks. Lastly, remember that it is not a good
   idea in general to start dressing very young children in ways that
   mimic sexually suggestive adult dress.
   
   A good approach to modesty is to wear a very long tee-shirt (i.e., one
   that goes to your knees) over your bathing suit. Many people do so for
   other reasons as well, such as to protect one's skin from the sun.
   There is less of a concern around the immediate family. Note that men
   and boys who are uncomfortable being bare-chested should also wear a
   T-shirt. Obviously, a dark-colored shirt should be worn so it won't go
   transparent when wet and defeat the purpose of wearing it in the first
   place...!

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.3.5: Playtime: Can my kid play with Playdough during
         Pesach?

Answer:
   
   If you are talking commercial playdough, the answer is no. Playdough
   contains chometz (products made from the 7 grains prohibited on
   Passover). An alternative solution to Playdough might be real clay or
   real modelling clay. You should read the ingredients to ensure that
   there are no chometz or chometz-derived ingredients.
   
   Note that, for traditional Jews, there would be a problem with real
   modelling clay during Shabbat, given the prohibitions on constructing
   things or creating (i.e, various forms of art).

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.4.1: Eating: Where can I find kosher baby food?

Answer:
   
   In the U.S. and Canada, some Heinz, Beech-Nut and at least one organic
   brand has at least a few kosher lines. Except with brands marketed
   specifically as kosher baby food, one should always look for a
   hechsher on the package, since many of these products contain meat and
   other non-kosher ingredients.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.4.2: Eating: Where can I find kosher for passover baby
         food?

Answer:
   
   Alas, few of the major manufacturers make a line of baby food
   specifically for Pesach, although in some areas a few manufacturers
   do. A local "kosher store" just before Pesach would probably be your
   best bet. However, you should check with your local rabbi or halachic
   authority, because there may be leniencies available -- on a local and
   limited basis only -- for products such as baby cereal or formulas.
   However, you should not use such products without consulting your
   rabbi.
   
   Note: You may be in the position of having to make your own. Another
   potential avenue is to check some of the online Kosher grocers, such
   as http://www.koshersupermarket.com/, http://www.wholesaleportal.com/.
   http://www.kosherfinder.com/, http://www.kosherfoodsdepot.com/,
   http://www.koshercornucopia.com/, or http://www.kosherfest.com/.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.5.1: Holidays: What are good activities for children for
         the major Jewish holidays?

Answer:
   
   The Jewish Theological Seminary maintains a website for family and
   children's holiday activities at http://learn.jtsa.edu/topics/kids/.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.6.1: Schooling: How do I determine the right type of
         religious program: day school vs. afterschool?

Answer:
   
   A day school education has the advantage of keeping the child's
   social, and secular training consistent. An after school program is
   often perceived by the child to show that the religious education is
   only an afterthought and is not as "important" as the "regular"
   classes. A day school education will also cover more ground, be
   integrated with the child's life, and teach the child throughout
   his/her entire school career.
   
   On the other hand, there are also advantages to public school plus
   afternoon Hebrew school. These include having school friends in the
   neighborhood, and the fact that non-Jews who go to school with Jewish
   kids are probably less likely to grow up to be antisemites than those
   who've never met a Jew before.
   
   The determination of the most appropriate choice depends on many
   factors: family finances, academic quality, child care options, the
   community, the religious schools available (there are fewer Reform day
   schools than Orthodox day schools, for example), transportation, the
   quality of the public school system, the attitude of the school if
   parents are not of the same movement, and other factors. Parents
   should also consider how close a match there is between the day
   school(s) available for their children and the family's own religious
   philosophy and level of observance.
   
   In any case, any form of Jewish education is important, and many a
   committed Jew is the product of afterschool education.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.7.1: B'nai Mitzvah: What is a bar/bat mitzvah?

Answer:
   
   A bar/bat mitzvah s considered legally responsible to fulfill the
   mitzvos. A boy becomes bar mitzvah at the age of thirteen and one day.
   Girls become bat mitzvah at age 12. This is usually celebrated by the
   child being called to read from the torah at the shabbat closest to
   their bar/bat mitzvah. As is common in Judaism, there is often a party
   afterwards, which can vary from the simple home reception to an overly
   ornate "theme" celebration.
   
   Until the child reaches bar/bat mitzvah age, they are responsible only
   as part of chinuch (training). After the bar/bat mitzvah, the child is
   legally an adult in the eyes of Judaism. This means the following:

     * They are now counted for a minyon (prayer quorum of ten).

     * They are responsible for wearing tefillin.

     * They are eligible for aliyot (being called up to read the Torah).

     * They are responsible to fast on fast days.

     * They are responsible for observing the mitzvot.
       
   With respect to Bat Mitzvah. The event itself has been recognized for
   many generations:

     * Rabbi Yosef Chaim in his book "Ben Ish Chai" [1883-1909, a rabbi
       from Bagdad] talks about the day of a girls Bat Mitzvah as a day
       of celebration on which she should wear a new outfit and say
       "She'he'chiyanu" and include her entrance to the "burden of
       Mitzvot" (Ol Mitzvot).

     * Rabbi Yitzchak Nissim Z"l quotes from Rabbi Mussafya (1606-1675,
       born in spain a rabbi and personal doctor of King Critian the IV
       of Denmark. later he moved to amsterdam) that the day of the Bat
       Mitzvah is a day of celebration and the dinner is a "Se'udat
       Mitzvah" (mitzvah dinner).

     * In Italy (Torrino and Milan) it was customary to gather the Bat
       Mitzvah girls and the community during a weekday, the girls stood
       in front of the open Aron Kodesh and recited (dividing the prayers
       among them) a special prayer written for them which included a
       blessing of Shehechiyanu and ended "Baruch Ata Hashem Lamdeynee
       Chukecha" (bless ..teach me your laws). [note, the prayer was also
       said by bar mitzvah boys]. Then the rabbi speaks and blesses the
       girls and their families. Afterwards, there is a Se'udat Mitzva at
       the girls' home
       
   However, none of these ceremonies involved the girl reading from the
   Torah. The first public bat mitzvah ceremony in which a girl read from
   the Torah is believed to have been for Judith Kaplan Eisenstein z"l,
   the daughter of Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan, the founder of the
   Reconstructionist movement. The ceremony has since been adopted by
   almost all movements in Judaism.
   
   Note that the focus of the bar/bat mitzvah should be the actual
   ceremony, not the party afterwards.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.7.2: B'nai Mitzvah: What's a good gift for a b'nai
         mitzvah?

Answer:
   
   The following are some of the ideas that have been suggested:

     * Jewish books involving torah study.

     * Ceremonial objects that allow observance at home: kiddish cups,
       seder plates, havdalah sets.

     * Ritual objects, such at tallitot.

     * Gift certificants for Jewish bookstores.

     * For girls, some communities give items for the dowry: sheets,
       towels, etc.

     * Fountain pens. :-)
       
   Remember that the gift is a celebration of coming of age. The present
   should be useful throughout the individual's Jewish life. Argues well
   for a fountain pen, doesn't it :-)
   
   It is a good idea to have the child register at a good Jewish book
   store so as not to be flooded with duplicate books or gifts. Gift
   certificates are nice in that they allow multivolume sets to be
   purchased without having to know the volumes that the child already
   owns.
   
   Lastly, you should not bring your gift with you to the ceremony (if it
   is held Friday evening or before sundown on Saturday), especially if
   you know the child is from a traditional Jewish household. For those
   that follow traditional halacha, carrying is forbidden on Shabbat
   [there are some exceptions, but as those vary from community to
   community, its just best not to carry at all].

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.7.3: B'nai Mitzvah: What is appropriate dress to wear to
         the b'nai mitzvah ceremony?

Answer:
   
   Since the usual acknowledgment is by having a kiddush in the synagogue
   the Shabbat of the bar/bat mitzvah (when the child is called to the
   torah for the first time) appropriate dress is that to be worn to
   Synagogue. This means you should dress as if you were going to the
   house of someone you deeply respect. For men, suits or sportjackets
   (subdued) and slacks. Ladies should wear appropriate dresses. In
   traditional congregations, women should not wear pants, and the dress
   should be appropriately modest (covering the elbows, knees, and not
   low-cut in front).
   
   In most congregations, when you arrive, men will be provided with a
   kipah (yarmulke) to wear (of course, if you have one, you may bring
   their own). In some, women also cover their heads; such congregations
   often provide a covering.
   
   If you are unfamiliar with Jewish congregational services, follow the
   lead of others attending the services. Stand when they stand. You
   should have prayerbooks provided.
   
   You should plan to arrive on time, but no more than 1/2 hour late.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.7.4: B'nai Mitzvah: What are the characteristics of a
         good b'nai mitzvah program?

Answer:
   
   An ideal program would start when the child is born and extend well
   into early adulthood. Be cautious about any program that claims that
   to prepare a child completely to fulfill his or her entire
   responsibilities as a Jew in a limited period of time. A program that
   encourages the children to pursue a lifetime of Jewish learning is
   better than one that lets him or her "cram" for just a year. The
   program should emphasize that Bar/Bat Mitzvah is the beginning, not
   the end, of a child's religious education.
   
   In any program a parent wants to have their child learn and be able to
   do the standard requirements of that program for their ceremony. At
   the very outset there should either be someone who will explain the
   entire process, or some written materials that will offer a guide to
   the congregation's program. Not every child is the same and not every
   bar/bat mitzvah is the same. Rather, due to a variety of variables
   (intermarriage, divorice, etc) some children are often facing more
   than just the task of Hebrew and leading the service.
   
   A key characteristic is parental involvement. When parents are
   involved, even when they might not be able to help with Hebrew they
   send an important message. They tell the child that this is important
   to them the parents. A program needs to have a role that the parent
   plays and places some responsibility beyond the financial and the
   party. Our children need to feel our presence in the journey and
   struggle to accomplish their bar/bat mitzvah. As a parent, you need to
   understand the program, the Heberw and the expectations on both your
   child and you. This will insure that it will be a family experience
   and that Torah is truly passed from generation to generation.
   
   Another factor is whether the program provides the motavation to
   continue Jewish education. Far too often, we lose our children to
   Jewish education after the Bar/Bat Mitzvah. The program must have
   characteristics that will keep the child motivated to stay in a Jewish
   learning environment. In general, look for programs that offer
   extra-curricular activities in addition to just "parsha" tutoring, to
   demonstrate that Judaism is something we live both in the synagogue
   and away from it, and to encourage lifelong religious involvement with
   peers.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.7.5: B'nai Mitzvah: How do I select a good b'nai mitzvah
         tutor?

Answer:
   
   A tutor is a less desirable option in general, because in a one-on-one
   situation, the child will see Judaism as an activity apart from the
   rest of his or her life. Synagogues will provide recommendations, but
   probably word-of-mouth is a better option. Attend a few Bar or Bat
   Mitzvahs and observe, not only to the quality of the singing, but how
   confident the child is on the bima, and his or her level of
   understanding of the Torah portion and haftorah. Beyond that, you
   should look for a teacher with whom you are comfortable and can work
   with. The teacher should be knowledgable, and should command the
   respect of the student.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.8.1: Other childhood lifecycle rituals: I've heard of a
         ceremony called "Consecration". What is it?

Answer:
   
   It is a ceremony used in Reform congregations to mark the beginning of
   formal Jewish education, usually with K or 1st grade. It is a group
   ceremony often celebrated on Simchat Torah, and usually the young
   participants are given a small replica of a torah (can you read
   4-point type?) to symbolize the start of their study of torah.
   Consecration is not based on traditional rituals, and is not observed
   in Orthodox congregations. Some Conservative congregations do observe
   the ceremony. They either call it "consecration", or opt for the more
   Jewish-sounding names.
   
   In the Orthodox community in England and Australia: The ceremony has
   nothing to do with children. The term "Consecration" refers to the
   official unveiling of a tombstone. Roughly a year (although often as
   early as 3 months or as late as 2 years), a minyan is held at the
   graveside while kaddish and a few psalms are recited.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.8.2: Other childhood lifecycle rituals: I've heard of a
         ceremony called "Confirmation". What is it?

Answer:
   
   In the non-Orthodox community, Confirmation is a ceremony used to mark
   the end of the tenth year of formal Jewish education, and usually
   corresponds to 10th grade graduation. It was originally introduced by
   Reform to replace Bar/Bat Mitzvah, but has evolved to parallel Bar/Bat
   Mitzvah, and provide a point of celebrating continuing Jewish
   education past Bar/Bat Mitzvah. Confirmation is a time for young
   adults to reconfirm the commitment to Judaism made at Bar/Bat Mitzvah,
   when they were legally adults but in this day and age not likely as
   mature as 12-13 years of centuries ago.
   
   Unlike bar/bat mitzvah, confirmation is a group ceremony often
   celebrated on Shavuot. It is not based on traditional rituals, and is
   not observed in Orthodox congregations. Some Conservative
   congregations observe the ceremony. It is either called
   "confirmation", "graduation", or the more Jewish-sounding "Bikkurim".
   Some refer to confirmands as "Sar Torah".

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.9.1: Coping with other religions: My child says all of
         his friends have Christmas Trees, and he wants one too. What do I
         say?

Answer:
   
   That as Jews, we celebrate our own holidays and that a Christmas tree
   is a statement that one is celebrating a different religion.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.9.2: Coping with other religions: My child's non-Jewish
         grandparents have asked her to help trim the tree. What do I do?

Answer:
   
   Some parents would say "yes" immediately; others would issue an
   outright refusal. The child knows her grandparents are not Jewish, and
   it might be helpful for her to see how they practice their religion
   and what sorts of things are important to them. But this must also be
   weighed against the potential for identity conflict and confusion in
   the child, who may begin to feel as though she is "sort-of" Christian,
   or Christian in some "honorary" kind of way. For young children (under
   10), it is probably not a good idea, as their Jewish identity is not
   yet fully-formed and they will definitely absorb the confusing message
   that Christianity is somehow just as much a part of them as their own
   religion.
   
   Note that this answer does not address some of the potential
   underlying reasons for the question; it assumes the child is being
   raised Jewish by both parents (one, quite likely, a convert, although
   there are situations where it is the grandparents that left Judaism
   after the children were born). The question gains significance if
   there is an attempt to raise the child with multiple faiths. Most of
   the main Jewish movements (Reform, Conservative, and of course
   Orthodoxy) do not believe that is possible, and recommend raising the
   child within Judaism only. However, the issue is quite complex, and
   some of the texts in the Intermarriage and Conversion reading list, in
   particular, the "After You've Done the Deed" section, are appropriate.
   URL: http://www.scjfaq.org/rl/int-afterwards.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.9.3: Coping with other religions: My child has been
         invited to an Easter Egg roll? What do I do?

Answer:
   
   The answer to this is similar to Question 21.9.2. Some parents would
   permit it, and some would not. As always, one must weighed any
   benefits against the potential for identity conflict and confusion in
   the child, who may begin to feel as though she is "sort-of" Christian,
   or Christian in some "honorary" kind of way. Additionally, Easter Egg
   rolls are public events, and one must be cautious about giving the
   image that Jews observe such events (this is especially true if one
   has obviously Jewish dress: kippahs, peyot, etc.). In general, it is
   probably not a good idea.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.9.4: Coping with other religions: My child has been
         invited to the Easter Egg roll on the White House lawn? What do I
         do?

Answer:
   
   Aside from the honor, the issues are the same as any ordinary Easter
   Egg hunt. The public factor, however, is more critical. You do not
   want to give the impression that this is an approved Jewish activity.
   
   In general, we shouldn't let the "importance" of an occasion blind us
   to our Jewish values. Don't leave them behind just for a chance to
   meet the President. If you would ordinarily feel that it was not
   appropriate, religiously, it's important to say no in this case, too.
   
   Of course, if you insist on going, get the President's autograph.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.10.1: Growing Older: My child wants to start dating? How
         do I ensure proper behavior?

Answer:
   
   Well, the "Dr. Laura" answer is for the child to wait until he or she
   is ready for marriage before serious dating can begin. Certainly, it's
   within the parents' right to be strict -- more than that, it is their
   responsibility. Regardless of what "all the other kids are doing", if
   you're serious about ensuring proper behavior, don't allow boys and
   girls to be alone together. They have no "right to privacy" in an era
   when teen pregnancies happen even to the smart kids (and even to the
   Jewish kids), and if they are living in your home, you can create and
   enforce standards you feel are morally appropriate. All of this may
   sound a little on the tough side, but to any sensible parent, it will
   seem like a small price to pay for knowing who your kids are with and
   who they're doing it with until they are old enough to be trusted.
   
   For those in the Conservative movement, the Rabbinical Assembly
   Commision on Sexuality has published "This Is My Beloved: This Is My
   Friend: A Rabbinic Letter on Intimate Relations". This booklet
   instructs laypeople in Jewish tradition's views of all areas of human
   sexuality, including dating and marriage. It is available from the
   United Synagogue Book Service
   (http://www.uscj.org/mall/bookservice.htm). More specifically, one of
   the members of that commission, Rabbi Michael Gold, wrote "Does God
   Belong in the Bedroom?" (JPS), which includes a chapter on this topic.
   He identifies sex keys that parents can provide their children with
   that will help them grow into responsible Jewish adults. These keys,
   briefly stated are: self-esteem; a positive body image; accurate
   knowledge about sexuality; Jewish values; a sense of holiness, and
   proper role models.
   
   The question that most Jewish parents ask today is how to deal with a
   teenage child who wants to date a non-Jew. Rabbi Alan Silverstein has
   dealt with the uneasy questions surrounding interfaith dating in "It
   All Begins with a Date: Jewish Concerns about Intermarriage" and
   "Preserving Jewishness in Your Family After Intermarriage Has
   Occurred". [Jason Aronson Inc. 1995] Written on behalf of the
   Conservative Movement's Leadership Council, these books offer a
   comprehensive guide for anyone struggling with interdating and
   intermarriage, from teenagers to parents to interfaith couples
   wondering how to raise their children. Rabbi Silverstein's own
   perspective on interfaith dating is that every date must be treated as
   a potential mate: "If you are committed to living in the US, you don't
   date a Scandinavian exchange student bent on returning home." With
   great ease, he segues from a hard line on prevention to the hard
   realities facing an intermarried couple. "The Conservative Movement's
   approach offers a combination of compassion and principle, one that
   teaches the ideal but deals with the reality." "It All Begins with a
   Date" offers a preventive approach to inter-dating and intermarriage
   and includes a section on raising children to value Judaism.
   "Preserving Jewishness in Your Family" understands that when
   intermarriage does occur, a new set of issues arises that requires
   equally careful examination, discussion and resolution. More
   information is available at http://www.uscj.org/intmar/statement.html.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.10.2: Growing Older: What other forms of body
         modification are allowed? Tattoos? Earrings?

Answer:
   
   In general, Judaism does not approve of the purposeful damaging of the
   body or the making of permanent marks. Thus, tattoos, branding, and
   the punching of holes through the body are not generally accepted.
   
   Earrings are a special case. The Torah does record that wearing an
   earring in the upper cartilage of the ear is a mark of slavery, and
   thus is not allowed. Wearing an earring in the fleshy lobe of the ear
   has a long history and has been allowed, but only for women. There is
   also a history of Haredi Jews wearing earrings, and there are records
   of Chassidic Jews wearing earrings to prevent or cure poor eyesight.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.11.1: Resource References: I need some information on
         Jewish Genetic Diseases. Where do I start?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of places that you can look:
    1. Consult the "Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man" database at The
       Johns Hopkins University
       (<http://gdbwww.gdb.org/omim/docs/omimtop.html>), or the GDB
       Genome Data Base (<http://gdbwww.gdb.org/>).
    2. Consult the National Foundation for Jewish Genetic Diseases:
       National Foundation for Jewish Genetic Diseases, Inc.
       250 Park Avenue
       Suite 1000
       New York, New York 10177
       (212) 371-1031
    3. If you are dealing with a Tay Sachs related disease:
       National Tay Sachs and Allied Diseases Association
       2001 Beacon Street
       Brookline, MA 02146
       (617) 277-4463
    4. If you are dealing with Mucolipidosis Type IV (ML4), an inherited
       metabolic storage disease traced back to Lithuania and Poland:
       ML4 Foundation
       719 East 17th Street
       Brooklyn , NY 11230
       ML4 Home Page: www.ml4.org
    5. If you are dealing with Fanconi Anemia, an inherited
       chromosomal/haematological disorder:
       Fanconi Anemia Research Fund, Inc.
       1902 Jefferson Street, Suite 2
       Eugene, OR 97405
       Phone:(541) 687-4658
       E-mail: info@fanconi.org
       Home Page: www.fanconi.org
    6. Check out some of the medical links at Hebrew University in
       Jerusalem (<http://www1.huji.ac.il/md/med_link.html>)

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Question 21.11.2: Resource References: Are there any recommended
         online resources on Jewish Childrearing or specifically for Jewish
         children?

Answer:
   
   With respect to Jewish childrearing, the following resources are of
   interest:
    1. soc.culture.jewish.parenting. The newsgroup
       soc.culture.jewish.parenting
       , and its parallel listserv, scj-parenting. If you cannot get the
       newsgroup, you may subscribe to the listserv by sending the
       command:
       subscribe scj-parenting your first and last names
       to the Shamash List Processor <listproc@shamash.org>.
    2. Torahtots. The Torahtots site (http://www.torahtots.org/) provides
       lots of good traditionally-orented coloring pages and information
       for children.
    3. Jewishfamily.com. The Jewish Family site
       (http://www.jewishfamily.com/) provides useful information for
       raising a Jewish family.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: How do I obtain copies of the FAQ?

Answer:
   
   There are a number of different ways to obtain copies of the FAQ:

     * WWW. If you are reading this on Usenet, and would like to see an
       online, hyperlinked version, go visit http://www.scjfaq.org/. This
       is the "web" version of the FAQ; the version posted to Usenet is
       generated from the web version. Note that the www.scjfaq.org
       version is a copy of the actual master version; if you want to
       access the master, visit http://master.scjfaq.org/.
       Alternatively, if you would like to see the posted version through
       the web, visit http://shamash.org/listarchives/scj-faq/. The FAQ
       is in the subdirectory "FAQ"; the reading lists are in the
       subdirectory "rl".

     * Email. Scjfaq.org also provides an autoretriever that allows one
       to obtain a copy of the FAQ by return Email. To use the
       autoretriever, you send a retrieval request to archives@scjfaq.org
       with the request in the body of the message. A more reliable way
       to retrieve these files is through the FAQ autoretriever
       (http://www.mljewish.org/bin/autoresp.cgi). For the FAQ, the
       request has the form:
       
     send faq partname
       For the reading list, the request has the form:
       
     send rl partname
       "Partname" is replaced by the name of the part, as shown in the
       general index. The following is a short summary of the mapping to
       partnames for the FAQ:

          + 01-FAQ-intro: Section 1: Network and Newsgroup Information.

          + 02-Who-We-Are: Section 2: Who We Are

          + 03-Torah-Halacha: Sections 3, 4: Torah; Halachic Authority

          + 04-Observance: Sections 5, 6, 7, 8: Jewish Holidays; Jewish
            Dietary Law and Kashrut; Sabbath and Holiday Observance;
            Woman and Marriage

          + 05-Worship: Sections 9, 10, 11: Jewish Worship; Conversion,
            Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"; Miscellaneous Practice
            Questions

          + 06-Jewish-Thought: Section 12: Jewish Thought

          + 07-Jews-As-Nation: Section 13: Jews as a Nation

          + 08-Israel: Section 14: Jews and Israel

          + 09-Antisemitism: Sections 15, 16, 17: Churban Europa (The
            Holocaust); Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews; Countering
            Missionaries

          + 10-Reform: Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + 11-Miscellaneous: Sections 19, 20: Miscellaneous; References
            and Getting Connected

          + 12-Kids: Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions

          + mail-order: Mail Order Judaica
       The following is a short summary of the mapping of partnames for
       the Reading Lists:

          + general: Introduction and General. Includes book sources,
            starting points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish
            readers, General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General
            Jewish History, Contemporary Judaism, Noachide Laws, Torah
            and Torah Commentary, Talmud and Talmudic Commentary,
            Mishnah, Midrash, Halachic Codes, Becoming An Observant Jew,
            Women and Judaism, and Science and Judaism.

          + traditional: Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle,
            Holidays. Includes Traditional Liturgy; Traditional
            Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer; Traditional Practice; The
            Household; Life, Death, and In-Between; and The Cycle Of
            Holidays.

          + mysticism: Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes
            Academic and Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality,
            and the Jewish notion of the Messiah.

          + reform: Reform/Progressive Judaism

          + conservative: Conservative Judaism

          + reconstructionist: Reconstructionist Judaism

          + humanistic: Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic
            Judaism)

          + chasidism: Chassidism. Includes general information on
            historical chassidism, as well as specific information on
            Lubavitch (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other
            approaches.

          + zionism: Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of
            Israel, The Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in
            Israel.

          + antisemitism: Antisemitism. Includes sections on
            Antisemitism, What Led to The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression,
            Antisemitism Today (Including Dealing with Hate Groups),
            Judaism and Christianity, and Judaism, Freemasonry and other
            rumors.

          + intermarriage: Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're
            Considering Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint,
            Conversion, and Coping With Life As An Intermarried.

          + childrens: Books for Jewish Children. Includes sections on
            Birth and Naming, Raising a Child, Family Guidebooks,
            Upsheren, Bar/Bat Mitzvah, Confirmation, Holiday Books for
            Children, Liturgy for Children, Bible and Torah for Children,
            Jewish History for Children, Jewish Theology for Children,
            Israel, Learning Hebrew, and Jewish Stories.
       Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu
       with the following line in the body of the message:
       send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
       Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory
       and filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading
       list, one would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

     * Anonymous FTP: All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists
       are archived on rtfm.mit.edu and are available for anonymous FTP
       from the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory (URL
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ/).
       Similarly, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
       pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory (URL:
       ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists).
       Note that the archived versions of the FAQ and reading lists are
       the posted versions; that is, they are each one large ASCII file.

------------------------------------------------------------

Subject: Jewish Childrearing FAQ Credits

   The Jewish Childrearing portion of the s.c.j. FAQ was developed by the
   soc.culture.jewish.parenting Advisory Board committee, the advisors
   and moderators of the soc.culture.jewish.parenting newsgroup, and past
   contributors to the S.C.J FAQ. Specific contributors include: Shoshana
   L. Boublil, Rabbi Jim Egolf, Robert Kaiser, Hillel Markowitz, Jennifer
   Paquette, and Linda Zell Randall. It is maintained by Daniel Faigin
   <maintainer@scjfaq.org>
   
   [Got Questions?] Comments and corrections are welcome; please send
   them to maintainer@scjfaq.org. Note that the goal is to present a
   balanced view of Judaism; where a response is applicable to a
   particular movement only, this will be noted. Unless otherwise noted
   or implied by the text, all responses reflect the traditional
   viewpoint. However, you should not make any assumption as to accuracy
   and/or authoritativeness of the answers provided herein. In all cases,
   it is always best to consult a competent authority--your local rabbi
   is a good place to start.
   
   A special thank you... Special thanks for her patience and
   understanding go to my wife, Karen, who put up with me hiding at the
   computer for the two months it took to complete the July/August 2000
   remodel of the entire soc.culture.jewish FAQ and Reading Lists. If you
   think the effort was worth it, drop her a note c/o
   maintainer@scjfaq.org.

------------------------------------------------------------
--
Please mail additions or corrections to me at maintainer@scjfaq.org.
Questions should be sent to questions@scjfaq.org.
Last Modified: 2000.09.09 06:33


End of S.C.J FAQ Part 12 (Jewish Childrearing Related Questions) Digest
**************************
-------
%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:06 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yg-000OVfC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:06 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05100
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:22:00 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 264DE7A120
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:09 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id 9BF477A12A
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:07 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28069 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:32 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:32 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032532.28068.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: mail-computer
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Content-Length: 71594
Lines: 2148

%%%StartText

Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.answers,news.answers,soc.culture.israel
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Jewish Resources by Mail-order and Computer
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
Summary: Provides information on mail-order books, book publishers, book
        stores, videos, religious articles, software, services, etc.


Archive-name: judaism/mail-order
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

                 Jewish Resources by Mail-order and Computer
         [Last Change: $Date: 1996/3/14 19:07:06 $ $Revision: 4.5 $]
                    [Last Post: Thu Mar 31 11:07:08 1994]

This posting contains a list of sources for various Jewish resources. Please
e-mail any additions or corrections  or requests for updates to Mordechai
Steve Seidman <srs3@crux3.cit.cornell.edu>.

The resources discussed are arranged by subject as follows:
(entries within each section are now alphabetized)

   JEWISH BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER
   PUBLISHERS OF RELIGIOUS BOOKS (many have mail-order catalogs too)
   GENERAL BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER (helpful for finding books)
   VIDEOS, TAPES, MUSIC etc.
   RELIGIOUS ARTICLES, tallit, kipot, challah covers, gifts, art etc.
   SERVICES, INFORMATION, NEWSPAPERS
   FOOD (hopefully Kosher!)
   EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES (for adults)

Note: not all of the comments are mine.  Many people helped to contribute
to this FAQ, and if anyone (including people who have already contributed
but whom i have unfortunately failed to include) does want to be
listed in the acknowledgements, send me your name, and I will include it.
Contributions made by: Mike Singer, Daniel Faigin, Evelynn Leeper, Jack Love,
Josh Backon, Robert D Hoberman, Arieh Lebowitz, Susan Doore, Michael Shulman,
Burton J. Francis (Dovie), Rabbi Tovia Singer, Aaron Peromsik, Judy Balint
Rabbi Eli Silberstein, Eric Marx, Simon Streltsov, Paul Helinski,
Chana Silberstein 

In general, 1-800's can be obtained from 1-800-555-1212 (information)

This posting is organized as a digest, and should be undigestifyable by
software such as Gnus or rn.  Please report any difficulties.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: Archival and Credits

Anonymous FTP:

  All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists are archived on
  shamash.org and on rtfm.mit.edu, and are available
  for anonymous FTP. The locations of this posting on shamash.org
  is as follows:

  ftp://shamash.org/israel/lists/scj-faq/mail-order

  The s.c.j FAQ and reading lists are also available on shamash.org
  and rtfm.mit.edu; they may be found in the directories:
        .../scj-faq/FAQ
  and
        .../scj-faq/reading-lists

  For more information on the FAQ and Reading Lists, please consult the first
  part of each:

  ftp://shamash.org/israel/lists/scj-faq/FAQ/01-FAQ-intro
  ftp://shamash.org/israel/lists/scj-faq/reading-lists/general

  If you are accessing the archives on rtfm.mit.edu, the pathname is
  pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism, instead of israel/lists/scj-faq.

Mail:
  The files may also be obtained via Email by sending a message to
  mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu with the following line in the body of the message:

        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)

  Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory and
  filenames; for example, to get this posting, one would say:

        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/mail-order

WWW/Mosaic:
  The FAQ, reading lists, and mail-order list are available by following the
  following pointer:

  http://www.cis.ohio-state.edu/hypertext/faq/usenet/judaism/top.htm

Credits:
  [TBS]

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: JEWISH BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER


Afikomen
        Afikomen
        3042 Claremont
        Berkeley CA
        (510) 655-1977.


Bob and Bob
        Bob and Bob
        151 Forest Ave
        Palo Alto CA
        (415) 329-9050.


Eric Chaim Kline Bookseller
        Eric Chaim Kline Bookseller
        1343 4th
        Santa Monica CA
        (310) 395-4747

    This bookstore specializes in a good collection of Judiaca and art
    books, but also has lots of other used books.  The owner constantly goes
    to book conventions and buys rare collections.


Gozlan's Sefer Israel Inc.
        Gozlan's Sefer Israel, Inc.
        28 West 27th Street, Suite 402
        New York, NY  10001
        (212) 725-5890
        (212) 689-6534 (FAX)

    Importers of Israeli Books and Judaica.  I have had good experience
    with this importer, and have ordered the *excellent* Rav Milon
    Hebrew-Hebrew-English dictionary from them (the one with hebrew & english
    definitions, and hebrew sample sentence) at a good price, prompt service.
    They have a list of about 29 texts, tapes, videos on Hebrew language
    instruction graded at six different levels of instruction.  This seems
    like a good place to look for serious Hebrew educational materials.


Israel Book Shop
        Israel Book Shop, Inc.
        410 Harvard Street
        Brookline, MA  02146
        (617) 566-7113
        (800) 323-7723

    Israel Book Shop has a catalog, but you can call the store to ask for
    the many items not listed in the catalog.  Their catalog concentrates
    mainly on Judaica Press, Soncino, and Metsudah (publishers of the famous
    interlinear Chumash, Siddur, Haggadah, Kitsur Shulchan Aruch,etc.  Those
    interlinear books can be a real nice aid in checking up on your Hebrew)


Lekutei
        The Montrose Corp., Lekutei
        c/o Yitzchok Rosenberg
        10 West 47th Street, Room 503
        New York, NY  10036
        (212) 719-1717

    THey have 20 volumes of Lekutei, all in Hebrew: Torah (7 volumes),
    Pirkei Avoth (2 vol), Agudas H'Shas (5 vol), Tehilim (2vol),
    Midrash Raba (3 vol), Megilot ( 1 vol).  Only $8.00 per volume + shipping.


Jerusalem Books, Ltd.
        Jerusalem Books, Ltd.
        P.O. Box 18189
        Jerusalem 91181
        ISRAEL
        +972 2-850858

    This is the only Israeli mail order book store I have dealt with,
    although no doubt there are others.  The prices are not cheap, but the
    selection is pretty good.  They have Hebrew and English titles published
    in Israel.


Jewish Book Center of the Workmen's Circle
        Jewish Book Center of the Workmen's Circle
        45 E 33rd btwn Park & Madison Avenues
        New York NY
        (212) 889-6800 x285
        (800) 922-2558

    Judaica and Jewish books in English and Yiddish.


Jewish Book Club
        Jewish Book Club
        P.O. Box 25022
        Lehigh Valley, PA 18003-9892
        (215) 437-2159

    Nice book club; there are no mininum requirements for purchasing.
    THeir benefit is that if you buy one book at regular member price
    you may also order something from the SPecial Discount Selection
    at savings up to 95% off.


The Jewish Bookstore Of Greater Washington
        The Jewish Bookstore Of Greater Washington
        11250 Georgia Avenue
        Wheaton, Maryland  20902
        (301) 942-2237

    This bookstore is run by a delightful father/son team who have been in
    the same location for many many years and have filled a double-store
    front area with about every imaginable title covering all corners of
    Judaica. They also stock quite a wide array of gifts, and Jewish novelty
    items. I'd love to see them get as many customers as their fine and
    complete inventory deserves!
    Proprietors: Joshua & Menachem Youlus: "If it's Jewish, we have it"


Jonathan David Co., Inc.
        Jonathan David Co., Inc.
        68-22 Eliot Ave.
        Middle Village, NY  11379

    Judaica Book Guide: 718-456-8611 FAX:718-894-2818. Call or write for a
    free book guide--no obligation to order. Many good deals. All
    major publishers represented. Steinsaltz for $36/volume.  etc.


Judaica World of Crown Heights, Inc.
        Judaica World of Crown Heights, Inc.
        329 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        (718) 604-1020

    This place had a rather extensive book selection, inluding
    Russian/Hebrew and Spanish/Hebrew.  They sell
    that are reasonably priced. Worldwide shipping, major credit cards accepted.


Levine Jewish Books and Judaica
        Levine Jewish Books and Judaica
        5 W 30th btwn 5th & 6th Avenues
        New York,  NY
        212-695-6888

Lisbon's Hebrew Books & Gifts
	Lisbon's Hebrew Books & Gifts
	2305 University Blvd., West
	Wheaton, Maryland 20902
	(301) 933-1800  (Chai!)
	(301) 933-7466  FAX

    Fine collection of jewish books, invitations, yarmulkes, supplies, etc.
    Happily does mail order world-wide. Nice people!


Ma'ayan Book Company, Inc.
        Ma'ayan Book Company, Inc.
        PO Box 2118
        Woburn, MA  01888
        (800) 262-2926
        (617) 938-6001
        (617) 938-6002 (FAX)


National Yiddish Book Center
        National Yiddish Book Center
        48 Woodbridge Street
        South Hadley, MA  01075
        Tel: (413) 535-1303
        Fax: (413) 5351007

    They are dedicated to saving Yiddish books (as well as seeing that they
    are where people can read them, not just in a warehouse).  They also
    keep members informed of various Yiddishkeit events around the country
    and the world.  (They even have a Yiddish linotype machine they saved
    from the wrecking crew!)  You can join them an get some magazine
    subcriptions and other benefits


Pinsker's Book Store
    1-800-JUDAISM is a good source to Pinsker's Book Store in Pittsburgh
    They may also sell a variety of non-book Jewish items over the phone,
    but not listed in their catalog.  Free shipping on orders over $100.
    Their catalog is a useful resource in itself.  Prices tend to be good,
    and they seem to have a constant sale price on Acalays 3 volume Hebrew
    dictionary (something anyone serious on Hebrew should be at least aware
    of this dictionary)

        America's Jewish Bookstore
        2028 Murray Avenue,
        Pittsburgh, PA  15217
        (800) 538-2476 (In USA)
        (800) 776-9545 (In Canada)
        (412) 421-6103 (FAX)

    They now have e-mail too: info@judaism.com. There is also a new
    gopher site: judaism.com.  The gopher gives you access to Pinskers Book
    Store in Pittsburgh and electronic direct marketing.


Ranaan Enterprises
        Ranaan Enterprises
        1096 Sparrow Rd.
        Jenkintown, PA  19046

    Judaica for children, books, cassettes, etc.  Free catalog.


Rosenblum's World of Judaica
        Rosenblum's World of Judaica
        2906 W Devon
        Chicago IL
        (312) 262-1700
        (800) 626-6536

    They put out a newsletter.  Call to inquire about books.


S. Goldman - Otzar Haseferim
        S.Goldman - Otzar Haseferim
        125 Ditmas Avenue
        Brooklyn, NY  11218
        (718) 972-6200
        (718) 972-6204  (FAX)

    This company sells books published by Soncino Press and Judaica Press
    (including a translation of Mikraoth Gedolot), and other works, such as
    Igrot Moshe of R. Feinstein.


Sepher Hermon Press.
        Sepher Hermon Press, Inc.
        1265 46th St.
        Brooklyn, NY  11219
        (718) 972-9010

    Sepher Hermon Press does mail-order, popular, scholarly & academic
    books, and will research special requests.  They are the distributors of
    The Jewish Travel Guide ($12 +$2shipping). It lists kosher restaurants,
    hotels, mikvaot, etc. all over the world.


Shoroshim Russian Judaica Resource Center
        Shoroshim Russian Judaica Resource Center
        1566 Coney Island Ave
        Brooklyn NY  11230
        (718) 692-0079
        (718) 252-5159 (FAX)

    This places specializes in Russian/Hebrew Jewish literature.
    161 Titles; good selection; Torah, Tania, Jewish Literacy, much more


Shvut Ami
	Shvut Ami
	10 Belilius St
	PO Box 6141,jerusalem

    Director: Rabbi Randy Eaton, they sell serious Russian books.
    They have a US "Friends of Shvut Ami", that's mostly the fundraising arm:

	Suite 3ES, 1025 5th Avenue
	New York, NY 10028
	(212) 249-0142


Tree of Life Book Club
        Tree of Life Book Club
        PO Box 115
        Boston, MA  02258
        (800) 360-TREE
        (617) 558-2700
        (617) 558-7651 (FAX)
        shalombk@treelife.com
        http://www.shore.net/~shalombk

    They have a catalog of about 130 books.


United Synagogue Book Service
        United Synagogue Book Service
        155 Fifth Avenue
        New York, NY 10010
        (212) 533-7800 x2003
        (212) 353-9439  FAX

    In addition to books published by United Synagogue, the Rabbinical
    Assembly, and the Jewish Theological Seminary, they also carry a small
    selection of books from other publishers, including the Steinsaltz
    Talmud ($36) and the JPS Torah Commentaries ($38).  Nice catalog, and
    includes lots of good Hebrew story books geared towards children with
    250 word vocabularies.  These are among the least expensive childrens
    Hebrew story books I have found.


also see:  (I need further info on this one)
WEST SIDE JUDAICA AT 2412 BROADWAY (89TH STREET) , MANHATTAN, (212-362-7846),
HAS A LARGE SELECTION OF HEBREW DICTIONARIES.


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: PUBLISHERS OF RELIGIOUS BOOKS (most have mail-order catalogs too)


AD  (An Israeli publishing company)
        AD
        18 Omri St.
        Tel Aviv, tel. 03-6481605

    They sell *great* modern Hebrew dictionar(ies) by Liora Weinbach
    and Edna Lauden.  In Libraries the name may be transliterated as
    "Li'orah Vainbakh".  Look for "Multidictionary: Bilingual Learners
    Dictionary; Hebrew-Hebrew-English, English-Hebrew" Hebrew title:
    "Rav Milon".  ISNB 965-390-003-x.  This dictionary includes hebrew
    definitions, sample sentences, gender and plural information plus
    English index.  They also give spellings of words in the full
    and partial orthography (ie. with and without nikud so you can see
    where those pesky yuds and vavs get added) and mark which syllable
    is stressed if it isn't the default last syllable.  other goodies too
    numerous to list.

    They also put out an a dictionary just like this but
    in Russian-English-Hebrew with Russian index. (ISNB 965-390-009-9)
    It is also called "Rav Milon" in English; so don't confuse the two
    when ordering.  THe Hebrew sections in both dictionaries are
    identical.  The latter dictionary has the index in Russian only.

    For beginners the same busy authors put out an abbreviated version
    of the above dictionary called "+2000, A dictionary for Learners
    of Hebrew".  The one i have is English-Hebrew-Amhari and indexed
    in Amhari in the back  (obviously designed for Ethiopian immigrants).
    It will still be useful to English speakers, but perhaps they put
    out a Hebrew-English (only) version.  Anyway this one for Ethiopians
    is ISBN 965-390-08-0.

    I have yet to find any other dictionaries that come even close to
    these in educational value.

    I have found that Gozlan's Sefer Israel is a good importer to obtain
    this book in the USA.


Artscroll/Mesorah Publications, Ltd.
    You can get Artscroll/Mesorah books directly from Artscroll:

        Mesorah Publications, Ltd.
        4401 Second Ave.
        Brooklyn, NY  11232

        (800) MESORAH (outside of New York State)
        (718) 921-9000 (in NYS)
        (718) 680-1875 (FAX)

    Write to them and ask for a catalog.  They have many items in paperback.
    A 10% discount on items ordered directly from them seems typical.  They
    are the famous publishers of The Artscroll Tanach Series, and the
    Schottenstein Talmuds (which might be at least as good for beginners and
    advanced students as the Steinsaltz Talmud... they are certainly *much*
    less expensive, and still have line by line translation and extensive
    footnotes) Many people recommend the Schottenstein over the Steinsaltz.
    Your mileage may vary.


Avotaynu, Inc.
		Avotaynu, Inc.
        P.O. Box 1134
        Teaneck, NJ  07666

    Send them a postcard, and see what you get.  They publish a great book
    Called "Jewish Personal Names" by Rabbi Shmuel Gorr.  Has lots of good
    Jewish references in it besides just being a trendy catalog of names.


Board of Jewish Education
		Board of Jewish Education of Greater New York
		426 West 58th Street
		New York, NY  10019-1102
		(212) 245-8200
		(212) 586-9579  (FAX)
		(212) 247-1957  (FAX)
		(212) 664-7976  (FAX)

   	THey put out some really great inexpensive educational materials.
    Of particular merit is the 224pg book "Haftarah Chanting" by Pinchas
    Spiro (2 optional companion tapes).(revised
    edition now available)  This book has instruction on
    Torah trope, haftarah reading, along with tropes for high holidays
    and all the other Megillahs (Esther, Eicha, etc)  and flash cards.
    Supposedly the best and most comprehensive book of this nature.
    Geared for Bar/Bat Mitzvah students.
	

Board of Jewish Education of Greater Washington
		Board of Jewish Education of Greater Washington
		Lehrman Community Services Building
		11710 Hunters Lane
		Rockville, MD  20852
		(301) 984-4455
		(301) 984-1670  TTY
		(301) 230-0267  FAX


    Educational materials and activities for the Jewish deaf.  They provide
    interpreter training, signs for the Jewish holidays and prayers, etc.
		

Breslov Research Institute

        NORTH AMERICA:
        Breslov Research Institute
        POB 587
        Monsey, NY 10952-0587
        (914) 425-4258
        (800) 33-breslov   for orders
        (914) 425-3018  (FAX)

        ISRAEL:
        Breslov Research Institute
        POB 5370
        Jerusalem, Israel
        02-824-641
        02-825-542 (FAX)

        EUROPE:
        Breslov Research Institute
        33, Waterpark Road
        Salford, M7 0FT
        Manchester, England
        061-795-1251
        061-795-2331  (FAX)

        AUSTRALIA:
        Breslov Research Institute
        c/o Uri Ben-Avraham
        45b Portland Street
        Dover Heights, NSW, 2030
        02-371-9850
        02-264-8792  (FAX)

    They sell some amazing (lesser know) Aryeh Kaplan books.  Who knows
    what other gems they may have.  Lots of books by Rebbe Nachman, of
    course.  Items in French and Spanish too.  They have a mail order catalog.


CIS Publishers & Distributors
        CIS Publishers & Distributors
        180 Park Ave.
        Lakewood, NY  08701
        (908) 905-3000
        (908) 367-6666 (FAX)
	(800) CIS-9003 (Priveledged Readers Membership Club)
	(800) 9-FAX-CIS  (FAX)

	CIS International (Israel)
	Rechov Mishkalov 18
	Har Nof,  Jerusalem
	Tel: 02-518-935

	CIS International (UK)
	89 Craven Park Road
	London N15 6AH
	England
	Tel: 81-809-3723

    Lots of really good books, tapes, videos, games .  Besides CIS publications
    they have a lot of stuff from Sepher-Harmon press and a few other
    publishers.  They have 18+ different Jewish travel guides... most
    complete selection I've seen anywhere.  They have no shipping charges
    on any order over $60, or 5 or more books.  Several levels of membership
    available offering 10% - 30% discounts.  Large selection of childrens'
    books too.


CCAR Press
        Central Conference of American Rabbis
        192 Lexington Avenue
        New York, NY  10016-6801
        (800) 935-CCAR
        (212) 684-4990
        (212) 689-1649 (FAX)

    Books (including Haggadah's, Siddur's, American Reform Responsa) from
    a Reform perspective.  They have a 'gender-sensitive edition' of their
    siddur.  Free shipping and handling on pre-paid orders over $50.00,
    otherwise add 15%.


Duben Books
        Duben Books
        405 West California Street
        Urbana, Illinois

    They sell a *great* 3 volume work book series called "Israeli Hebrew
    for Speakers of English" c 1978, by Gad Ben-Horin, et al. Series
    is Peter Cole.  Address all comments to

        Professor Peter Cole
        Department of Linguistics
        University of Illinois
        Urbana, Illinois  61801

    These books are not self contained but are a great addition for any
    course on modern Hebrew, and can be used for self study if combined
    with a suitable grammar book.  The big advantage of this book is that
    they start to acclimate the student to reading Hebrew *without* the
    nikud from the very beginning.  This is an important skill to develop
    and turns out not to be such a big deal providing that the student
    gets used to reading Hebrew without nikud early in their education.


EKS Publishing Co.
        EKS Publishing Co.
        5346 College Avenue
        Oakland, CA  94618
        (510) 653-5183
        (510) 653-0350 (FAX)

    They produce a number of well known adult (and childrens) Hebrew
    learning materials.  In particular "The First Hebrew Primer, 3rd ed."
    "Prayer Book Hebrew the Easy Way" along with some tapes to help
    one learn pronouciation.  The books have good and simple
    explanations of grammar and reading comprehension; and are suitable for
    self-study, and remedial work.  Mail-order catalog available.


Feldheim Publishers
        Feldheim Publishers
        200 Airport Executive Park
        Spring Valley, NY 10977
        (800) 237-7149
        (914) 425-1908 (FAX)

    Feldheim publishes contemporary Orthodox and Jewish classic books,
    including the English translations of the Kehati Mishnah commentary and
    the Mishnah Berurah.  They publish the Hebrew textbook "Ha-Yesod" by
    by Luba Uveeler, N. Broznick which is a particularly good book for
    self-study of Hebrew.  This book starts from the beginning and is
    comprehensive and self-contained.


Hebrew Publishing Company
        Hebrew Publishing Company
        P.O. Box 157
        Rockaway Beach, NY 11693
        (718) 945-3000
        (718) 945-3063

    They produce many Hebrew books and educational materials. Of particular
    merit is a thin paperback called "the Yiddish Teacher" by H. E. Goldin.


Jason Aronson Publishers

    The Jason Aronson Publishers' Judaica catalog is now online
    on the World Wide Web.  Use Mosaic, Lynx, or any other WWW
    browser to access the URL: http://www.aronson.com/clients/aronson/
    At the moment, the catalog only contains brief descriptions
    of all of the books.  We will soon be adding author interviews.
    You can order books online by sending email to orders@aronson.com
    Jason Aronson, Inc. is a publisher of books in Judaica and
    psychotherapy based in NJ.  Here is another place to look
    http://www.flightpath.com/Clients/Aronson/Judaica/titles


Jewish Publication Society
        Jewish Publication Society
        O,Neill Highway
        Dunmore PA  18512
        (800) 355-1165
        FAX (717) 348-9297

    They sell direct, and also have a membership (which seems not to
    really cost anything or have sign up fees that offers a small discount)
    They have a large number of childrens books.  They have also published
    the famous "New JPS" Tanakh translation (one of the few English
    translations of the whole tanakh in one volume.  Most other publishers
    will have multi-volume editions of the Tanahk.  The older JPS (c 1917)
    translation was a slightly modified KJV (King James Version) and proved
    rather inadequate.  The new translation is to rectify some of those
    problems, but some consider the results to be iffy.  Secular academics
    tend to like it.  Your mileage may vary!  I would say the translation
    reads well, the English is fluid, but they put sentences toghether in
    various ways that make this book less suitable as an aid Hebrew study.
    Other translations might be better suited for that goal.  Still this
    book will also be a valuable study aid.


Joseph Simon, publisher
        Joseph Simon, publisher
        P.O. Box 4071
        Malibu, CA  90265
        (800) 338-8122  credit card orders onl
        (310) 457-3293  orders.
        (310) 457-1601  FAX orders

    They publish a good book for learning Yiddish called, obviously,
    "Learning Yiddish, in easy stages" by Marvin Zuckerman.
     Write for a Mail-order catalog.

    The address of Marion Herbst will provide an answer booklet and a
    tape to accompany this book.  good luck!

        Marion Herbst
        1311 N. Kenter Avenue
        Los Angeles, CA 90049


Kehot Publication Society
        Kehot Publication Society
        770 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY 11213
        (718) 774-4000

    Publisher for the Chabad-Lubavitch Movement: many publications in
    English for children and adults, as well as in Hebrew, Yiddish, French,
    Spanish and Russian. Chabad has its own host on Internet and also has a
    gopher site. Publications on line and also listserv for weekly, daily or
    general material.  Gopher lubavitch.chabad.org or telnet 199.26.225.2
    and login as gopher and no password. (terminal should be set to vt-100
    or equivalent). On web http://132.197.9.38:7700/chabad/chabad.html
    or  http://www.utexas.edu/students/cjso/Chabad/chabad.html
    or  http://www.utexas.edu/students/cjso/index.html

		Central Organization for Jewish Outreach
		383 Kingston Avenue, Suite #132
		Brooklyn, NY  11213
		(718) 953-2444
		(718) 953-2445
		cojo@chabad.org

    In particular, you can check out Chabad-Lubavitch in Cyberspace through
    this central organization.

    Their retail bookstore is at:

        Merkos Books
        291 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn,  NY  11213
        (718) 778-0226
        (718) 778-4148 (FAX)

    They take phone in orders via credit cards and also have a book club
    that will send you new books as they are published at a 45% discount
    off the already low retail price.  Write for details about opening
    an account with them if interested.  I have phoned in orders to them
    when they have their booksales and recieved good service.

    They also produce a number of very good cassette tapes that can be
    ordered from

        SICHOS in English
        788 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        (718) 778-5436

	Another Chabad publisher (of the famous resource guide for
	Chabad shluchim (by Rabbi Greenburg)
	
		Nshei Ubnos Chabad
		398 Kingston Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11225
		(718) 498-1773
		(718) 604-0594 (FAX)


Keren Aniyim
        Keren Aniyim
        1314 Avenue J
        P.O.B. 443
        Brooklyn, NY  11230
        (718) 951-1010

    Need further info on this one.  they might produce the Metsudah
    series.


Ktav Publishing House
        Ktav Publishing House
        900 Jefferson Street
        Hoboken NJ  07030-7205
        (201) 963-9524
        FAX (201) 963-0102

    Ktav also has a Jewish Gift Catalog, mostly items for children.  They
    want $2.00 for the catalog; but if you make order over $25.00 within 3
    months, they will credit you the $2.00.  Many of their books have
    a slightly more academic orientation.  They have some sort of
    affiliation with Yeshiva University, I believe  (perhaps someone
    has some good information about this)  btw:  I ordered their catalog
    which was a nice list of what they published, but for ordering they
    simply gave the phone number of 1-800-JUDAISM; so it seems that
    Pinsker's in Pittsburgh is distributing their books for them.


Langenscheidt Publishers, Inc.
        Langenscheidt Publishers, Inc.
        46-35 54th Road, Maspeth
        New York, NY  11378

    They sell a good pocket Hebrew dictionary for about $10 that
    contains 8,000 entries that supposedly covers the entire vocabulary
    of the 'Old Testament' (sic).  It is by Dr. Karl Feyerabend; and
    seems to be about the best Biblical Hebrew dictionary around.
    The book contains plural, gender, & contstruct forms of many if not
    most of the entries.  Very convenient to use.  Exercise caution when
    using this dictionary to research controversial words, however.


Moznaim Publishing Corp.
        Moznaim Publishing Corp.
        4304 12th Avenue
        Brooklyn NY  11219
        (718) 438-7680 or (718) 853-0525
        FAX (718) 438-1305

    They publish the Me'Am Le'Oz Tanakh commentaries and are translating
    Rambam's Mishnah Torah (Rabbi Touger).  Many other great publications.


Orthodox Union/NCSY Publications
        Orthodox Union/NCSY Publications  (good books from Aryeh Kaplan!)
        333 Seventh Ave.
        New York, NY  10018
        (212) 563-4000 (phone for OU)

    A complete publications catalogue and volume discounts available.
    They sent me the Artscroll Library cataglog (10% discount)


Robinson Books
	Robinson Books
	31 Nachlat Benjamin St.
	Tel-Aviv 65162  Israel
	
	Address all mail to:
	
	Robinson Books
	P.O.B. 4308
	Tel Aviv 65162  Israel

   They put out catalog(s) (4 different subscription catalogs containing books from
   4 categories: New titles, Rabbinca, Monthly selection of about 300 rare or out of print items,
   and a Random Item catalogue)  Quite a lot of Hebrew/English/German stuff for the serious book
   collector, or researcher.
 
 
Seth Press
        Seth Press (write or call for free catalog)
        P.O. Box 1370
        Bryn Mawr, PA  19010
        (215)642-8633
        **this one is out of business or moved ...help**


Shapolsky Publishers
        Shapolsky Publishers
        136 West 22nd St.
        New York, NY  10011
        (212) 633-2022
        (212) 633-2123 (FAX)

    They sell a most unusual book called "the Word",The Dictionary
    that reveals the Hebrew Source of English, by Isaac E. Mozeson.
    It might be helpful for learning Hebrew.  This is one book that
    really takes the idea of the monogeneis of languages (ie the story
    of Babel) seriously.  There is certainly much that is fun to learn
    in this book, and if you like Greek and Latin too, you will have a ball.
    There is some controversy over this book; and it is possible that
    its finding might be wrong or unprovable, but one utilitarian view is
    that even if the etymology is wrong it still might be helpful for
    remembering the words (or writing poetry :)
    Isaac Mozeson can be reached at 201-836-3410


Soncino Press
        Soncino Press
        5 Essex Street
        New York,  NY 10002
        **this address is out of date...i need the new one..HELP **

    Send for catalog.  Famous publishers of Bible,Zohar, Midrash Rabbah,
    Talmud, etc.  This is the new address, that I haven't been able to check:

        Soncino Press
        123 DitmasAve.
        Brooklyn, NY  11218
        (718) 972-6200
        (718) 972-6204 (FAX)


UAHC Press
        UAHC Press
        838 Fifth Ave,
        New York, NY  10021
        (212) 249-0100
        (212) 734-2857 (FAX)

    The have a large and very good catalog of books, educational materials
    and torah tapes (often geared as bar mitzvah teaching aids).  I think
    this catalog is a must: even though it is from a Reform place the
    Hebrew teaching materials (among other things) can be of great use
    for anyone.  This place publishes an  *extremely* good 3 volume
    elementary Hebrew reader of childrens stories.  They are excellent for
    self study by adults too.  This is the "Mah Tov" series by Abraham
    and Adaia Shumsky (only $6.00 per volume)  Each volume contains
    10 stories (about 100 pages/volume) that illustrate charity, or humbleness
    or some theme of that nature.  Each story has an english/hebrew
    glossary of vocabulary words for that story.
    There are workbooks and teachers guides
    available ($6/vol and $3.50/vol respectively).  Educational discounts
    available.


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: GENERAL BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER (helpful for finding books)

  (items in this section are general book sellers that often have
   interesting Judaica books, or academic and scholarly books)

You can anonymous ftp rtfm.mit.edu to get lists of mail-order books/catalog
/pub/usenet/news.answers/books/stores/ship-by-mail
/pub/usenet/news.answers/books/catalogues


Basic Books
        Basic Books
        (800) 331-3761


Blackwell's Rare Books
        Blackwell's Rare Books
        38 Holywell Street
        Oxford OX1 3SW
        England
        (0865) 792792
        FAX (0865) 248833

    A good generic mail order place in the UK.


Cody's
        Cody's
        2454 Telegraph
        510 Berkeley CA
        (510) 845-7852

    "One of the two stores in the Bay area I hold up as the definition of
    the term 'bookstore.' (The other is Kepler's in Menlo Park.)"  A very
    large selection of just about everything (foreign-language books on
    Dwight just west of Telegraph).  "Cody's is the only book store in the
    Bay Area with a significant selection of books on various subjects that
    interest me (including Judaica, system dynamics and whitewater maps).
    It is true that it isn't as good as it was when Fred Cody was alive
    ... but it's still a damn good store." There is even a book about
    Cody's: CODY'S BOOKS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF A BERKELEY BOOKSTORE,
    1956-1977, by Pat and Fred Cody (it was described in an article in the
    August 3, 1992 issue of "Publishers Weekly").  Will ship worldwide.
    Sun-Thu 9:15AM-9:45PM, Fri-Sat 9:15AM-10:45PM.  GMT-8h


Dover Publications, Inc.
        Dover Publications, Inc. [US]
        31 East 2nd Street
        Mineola, NY 11501

    Write for catalogue: Dover Complete Catalog of Fiction, Literature And
    Language Learning.  Mostly paperbacks.  Very low prices.  Some of the
    books are cheaply constructed.  Nice selection, lots of reprints of
    books.  No phone numbers, no credit cards.  Money-back guarantee.
    Optional mailing (UPS, US post, foreign orders).  Two Dover Bookstores:
    180 Varick St., 9th floor, New York, NY 10014 (9am-4:30pm M-F) and 11
    East Second St., Mineola, NY 11501 (9am-3pm M-F).
    They publish an inexpensive translation of Maimonides Guide for the
    Perplexed, among other interesting items.


Eisenbrauns/Scholar's Source
        Scholar's Source/Eisenbrauns
        P.O. Box 275
        Winona Lake, IN 46590-0275
        (219) 269-2011

    Eisenbraun's publishes secular academic books on the ancient Near East,
    including Biblical Israel.  They also sell similar books from other
    publishers under the name Scholars Source, including some second hand
    items, which go fast.  Most of their books from other publishers are
    sold at a 10 to 20 percent discount.  The book "Biblical Hebrew Syntax"
    is an interesting book, by Waltke and O'Connor.


Ideal Book Store
        Ideal Book Store
        1125 Amsterdam at 115th
        New York NY
        (212) 662-1909

    Almost exclusively a humanities and social sciences bookstore.  "Ideal
    has the best philosophy collection in New York, and that includes the
    Strand.  They also have a very extensive collection of Judaica.  The
    books are used but the proprietor is a stickler for only shelving books
    in the best possible condition.  I recently went looking for a biography
    of and primary works by Simone Weil and Ideal had everything I needed
    where most places--again, including the Strand, which I love--had very
    little."


James Press
        James Press
        (800) 247-6553


Powell's City of Books
        Powell's City of Books
        1005 W. Burnside
        Portland,
        (503) 228-4651
        (503) 228-4631 (FAX)
        (800) 878-7323
        (800) 225-6911
        ping@technical.powells.portland.or.us  (for technical book database)

    Give them a call and they will search for *any* book.  they have
    new and used books by the millions; with depth and coverage greater
    than most large-city libraries.  ships world-wide.


The Scholars Bookshelf
        The Scholars Bookshelf
        110 Melrich Rd.
        Cranbury, NJ 08512

    They put out many catalogs each year with a lot of closeouts in many
    different areas.  History, philospophy, literature, Judaica..  The
    catalog I got yesterday includes Miamonides: Guide to the Purplexed,
    39.95, pictorial history of the Holocaust, and Steinsaltz's Talmud.
    They do not indicate a telephone number, but will respond to mail
    inquiries.


Scholars Press
        Scolars Press Customer Services
        P.O. Box 6996
        Alpharetta, GA  30239-6996
        (800) 437-6692
        (404) 475-9245
        (404) 442-5114

    Call for catalog.  They are one important source for academically
    and research oriented materials.  They do have a substantial
    discount for members... and recognize membership in a number of
    other organizations.  They are also on WWW server at:

        http://scholar.cc.emory.edu

    address questions to jadair@unix.cc.emory.edu  who is James R. Adair,
    managing editor for the TELA site.  there are on-line catalogs, info
    on meetings, grants, employment opportunities etc.  THey are concentrating
    on academic and sholarly resources in biblical literature, religion,
    philology, philosophy, classics, archeology, history...  check it out!


Seminary Cooperative Bookstore
        Seminary Cooperative Bookstore
        Chicago Theological Seminary
        58th Street and University Avenue
        (800) 777-1456

    "Has a good theological section but its only connection with the
    Seminary is that it rents space from them. It is, in my opinion, the
    best academic bookstore in the social sciences and humanities in the
    world, for English-language books at any rate.  Anyone can shop there,
    but members receive a 10% discount on most books and may special-order
    books from anywhere in the world.  Membership costs $30 (for three
    shares of stock)."  (Ask them for further details.)  They will ship
    worldwide.  "Books arrive well-packaged and I've never gotten a damaged
    one."


Strand Book Store
        Strand Book Store
        828 Broadway (at 12 th St.)
        New York City, NY  10003-4805
        (212) 473-1452
        (212) 473-2591 (FAX)
        (800) 366-3664 Catalog/Credit Card orders only ($20 mininum)

    They put out a catalog of general interest, and will also do book searches.
    The catalog is an absolute must as it contains many Judaica items.
    They have Steinsaltz Talmud at $34/volume and Klein's Eytmological
    Dictionary for $15 plus many other great items. Specifically, Klein's
    can be obtained from catalog H-7.


WordsWorth Books
        WordsWorth Books
        30 Brattle Street
        Cambridge MA  02138-3761
        (800) 899-2202 or (617) 354-4223
        FAX (617) 354-4674
        info@wordsworth.com

    The flag-ship of Harvard Square book shops with 100,000+ titles.  Has
    been offering their book store service through e-mail for quite a while.
    "Their staff have managed to locate and send many books for me (in
    Sweden) via UPS Express at costs equal or less than buying at a real
    store (hardcovers especially).  What's more, the book search costs only
    one dollar.  Their collection is really huge, too."  Mon-Sat
    8:30AM-11:30PM, Sun 10AM-10:30PM).  GMT-5h


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: VIDEOS, TAPES, MUSIC etc.


Barron's Educational Series, Inc.
        Barron's Educational Series, Inc.
        250 Wireless Blvd.
        Hauppauge, New York  11788
        (800) 645-3476 (to order: ext: 204, 214, 215)
        (516) 434-3723 (FAX)

        Georgetown Book Warehouse,
        34 Armstrong Ave.
        Georgetown, Ont.  L7G 4R9
        (800) 247-7160  (for Canada)
        (905) 877-5575 (FAX)

    They sell the Foreign Service Insitute Lanuage Series.
    about $80 for the  12 cassette Hebrew Set,
    or $15 for just instruction book
    or $18 for a smaller 2 cassette set.
    They also sell "201 Hebrew Verbs Fully Conjugated in All tenses"
    by Abraham S. Halkin (an *excellent* book) for $12.
    20% discount for educators, and free shipping for prepaid orders
    over $25.


Books on Tape
        Books on Tape.
        Box 7900 MM
        Newport Beach, CA 92658
        (800) 626-3333

    Nearly 3000 best sellers to choose from.  THe books are *unabridged*, up
    to 15 cassettes which you rent for 1 month.
    This is a general interest selection, not strictly Judaica. Free Brochure.


Chadish Media
        Chadish Media
        453 East 9 Street
        Brooklyn, NY 11218
        (718) 8563882

    They sell books and tapes to teach you how to daven, conduct service,
    trup/cantillation, etc.  I haven't determined yet wether they use
    Sephard or Ashkenaz prounciations


The Commuter's Chavrusah
        The Commuter's Chavrusah
        Rabbi Yissocher Frand
        Maggid Shiur, Ner Israel Yeshiva.

        Yad Yechiel Institute
        P.O. Box 511
        Owings Mills, MD 21117-0511


Ergo Media
        Ergo Media
        688 American Legion Drive
        P.O. Box 2037
        Teaneck, NJ 07666-1437
        (800) 695-3746
        (201) 692-0663  (FAX)

    Jewish videotapes in English,and Hebrew and Yiddush (with English
    subtitles) Big selection, but only a small portion of it is religiously
    oriented.  They also have videos of Modern Israeli popular movies,
    perhaps some documentaries too.


Kol-Ami
        Sisu Home Entertainment, Inc,
        20 West 38th Street, 2nd Floor
        New York, NY  10018

    I just got a catalog from Sisu Home Entertainment, Inc.,
    Their mail order division  Nefesh Ami is now called Kol-Ami
    The content of the catalog appears unchanged.  Books, sheet music,
    song books, CDs, cassettes and videos.
    The new phone and address is:

        Kol-Ami
        P.O.Box 381
        Hicksville, NY 11802-0381
        800-393-4AMI (4264)
        516-933-2196, 212-768-8889
        212-768-7413 (FAX)

    Recently, I saw another adress for them (in the Jerusalem Post)

        Kol-Ami, Inc.
        18 W. 27th St. 10th floor
        New York, NY  10001
        (800) 393-4264
        212-779-7944
        212-779-7115 (this might be a FAX #)

    Among other items they are selling they now have Hebrew language
    instructional videos; introduce 1,000 vocab words, presumably
    equivalent to a year of Ulpan.


Mostly Music
		Mostly Music
		4805 13th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 438-7322
		(718) 438-3845
		(800) 5-MOSTLY

	THis is an excellent store in the heart of Borough Park, Brooklyn.  They have an
	extensive collection and also put out a large 32 page mail order catalog.  Lots of
	stuff by Sholomo Calebach, Tapes of chassidic niggunim for only $4, CD's, catorial,
	childrens', israeli and yiddish music, etc.


M & M Enterprises
        M & M Enterprises
        P.O. Box 1103
        Forest Hills, NY 11375
        (718) 263-0604
        FAX (718) 520-0280 (send for brochure)


Shalheves, Inc.
		Shalheves, Inc.
		PO Box 361
		Monsey, NY  10952
		(800) 998-0400 (orders)
		(914) 356-3515 (non-orders)
		(914) 425-2094 (FAX)

    They sell a 12 hour tape set for $37.95 by Rabbi Ezriel Tauber on how to
    rejuvenate your marriage.  Other items available too.  Call for catalog
    with thousands of tapes, book, videos in English, Hebrew, Yiddish, Spanish
    French, Portugeuse. Membership subscriptions and priveleges available. Free
    shipping and handling, major credit cards accepted.


Sichos in English
        Sichos in English
        788 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        (718) 778-5436


SyberVision Systems, Inc.
        SyperVision Systems, Inc.
        One Sansome Street, Suite 810
        San Franscisco, CA 94104
        (800) 888-9885

    They sell language tapes; a 16 tape set (about 30 half hour lessons)
    will teach you 500 words and phrases most often used in the daily lives
    of native foreign speakers using the "Pimsleur Technique" and
    "Graduated Interval Recall"  In addition to Hebrew, they have French I &
    II, Spanish I & II, German I & II, Italian, Portugeuse (Brazilian),
    Japanese, Russian I, Chinese (Mandarin), Arabic, Modern Greek, and
    English as a second language for Spanish speakers.  The brochure has no
    price, but on the phone they said it was about $300/set., and 30 day
    money back if not satified.


Tara Publications
        Tara Publications
        29 Derby Ave.
        Cedarhurst, NY 11516
        (516) 295-2290
        FAX: (516) 295-2291 (large mail-order business too)

    Jewish music books. Presumably this is the largest publisher


Torah Communications Network
        Torah Communications Network
        Box 504 Wickliffe
        Wickliffe, Ohio 44092
        (216) 585-0505
        (216) 944-6217 (FAX)

    100's of Torah lectures on cassette tape at $6.00/tape, or $5.00/tape
    if more than 5 tapes are purchased.  Lectures on Nach, Talmud, topical
    talks on Tzedakah, Halchic issues related to modern careers, plus
    much more.  A few tapes are in Hebrew and also Yiddish.
    Send for catalogue.


Twerski Tapes
        Congregation Beth Jehudah
        2700 North 54th Street
        Milwaukee, WI  53210
        Twerski Tapes (800) 878-5000

    Tapes from several Twerskis, including Rebbitzen Twerski.  Lots of good
    lectures available.  Many sale items and discounts available.


Ultimate Issues 
	Ultimate Issues
	10573 W. Pico Blvd.
	Los Angeles, CA  90064-2300
	(310) 558-3958
	(310) 558-4241  (FAX)
	(800) 225-8584

    Dennis Prager puts out a quartly called "Ultimate Issues"  This place
    also sells a Russian as well as English version of "the nine questions
    people ask about judaism" which is a very informative book, and perhaps
    the best book that shows that you can follow Judaism and still be an
    intelligent rational person too.  The Russian addition is a sorely needed
    outreach tool.  However, the main thing sold here are tapes, video, and
    more tapes.  Prager certainly has been busy as a beaver, with all sorts
    of lectures, courses, radio talk shows, tv talk shows, and other
    articles.

Visual Educational Association
        Visual Educational Association
        581 Leffel Lane
        PO Box 1666
        Springfield, Ohio  45501
        (800) 243-7070
        (513) 324-5503
        (513) 324-5697 (FAX)

    They make flashcards (of Biblical Hebrew as well as many other
    languages) and other educational materials too.
    The catalog order form lists modern Hebrew as well.


Other:
    Polish/Jewish/Holocaust Video: 'The Last Chapter' not available for rent
    or in stores. (800) 423-6527 x12

    Master Daf, Each $3.00 tape consists of approximately 5 blatt. (800)
    213-6626, in Israel 03-579-4067

Tape of Yiddish & Ladino Folksongs ($11)
        Noah's Dove
        PO Box 1028R
        Trinidad, CA  95570


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: RELIGIOUS ARTICLES, tallit, kipot, challah covers, gifts, art etc.

A.O.S. Inc Imports/Zerach Greenfield
		A.O.S/Greenfield
		140-35 69th Avenue
		POB 670263
		Flushing, NY  11367
		(718) 263-6445
		(800) 263-6445
		(718) 263-6447
		74640,2111@compuserve.com

    Israeli Judaica imports, presumably at wholesale prices.  Quantity ordering
    and special orders available, etrogim, tefillin, torah, aleph-bet beads,
    and just about everything else one could think of.  for example, tefillin
    are $155 in orders of 16/year.  I haven't recieved word on how reliable the
    kashrut of the tefillin are, however; but does sound like a sensational price.
    
    
Brica Sargous Jacobs
        Brica Sargous Jacobs
        2424 Brambleton Rd.
        Baltimore, MD  21209
        (401) 664-5658

     Custom tallit, etc.


California Stitchery
        California Stitchery
        6015 Sunnyslope Ave.
        Van Nuys, CA 91401-3020
        800-345-3332
        Fax:  800-781-2120

    Judy Rosenbaum has a large collection of jewish needlework including
    challah cover (kits), cross-stitch and needlepoint pictures, keppot,
    tallis bags (tallit too).  I haven't found any other source for
    jewish needlework (all kits, these are not premade).


Contemporary Synagogue Art
        Presentations Gallery
        200 Lexington Ave.
        New York, NY  10016
        212-481-8181
        212-779-9015 (FAX)

        Ascalon Studios
        115 Atlantic Ave.
        Berlin, NJ.  08009
        (609) 768-3779

        Jaffa Collections
        (800) 274-0086 (East Coast)
        (800) 473-5232 (West Coast)



Copa Judaica
		Copa Judaica
		12283 SW 129 Ct.
		Miami, Fl  33186
		(800) 727-COPA
		(305) 235-8666
		(305) 235-6070 (FAX)

    Very artistic Shabbat Candelabra, Menorah, Sedar Plates, Mezuzah Cases, Jewelry,
    Wooden Judaic Dominoes (unique item), Modernistic Yads (unique), etc. 


Corporate Expressions
        Corporate Expressions
        421-13 Route 59
        Monsey, NY 10952
        (800) 336-2291

    Bentchers, Yarmulka's Ketubahs, etc.  Complete catalog Quantity
    discounts for weddings, 16 different kinds of really nice bentchers, 10
    different kinds of kipot (in leather).


Eichler's
		Eichler's
		5004 - 13th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 633-1505
		(718) 633-1506 (FAX)
		(800) EICHLER  (outside of N.Y.S)

    Very complete selection of religious articles, gifts and books.  They stock
    some very hard to find Judaica books.  Open sunday, and worldwide shipping
    within 24 hours.  Seforim, Taleisim, custom Kesubos, Tefillin, CD's you
    name it!  For wholesale call 718-633-2933.  Located in the heart of
    Borough Park.
    

Galerie Robin
        Galerie Robin
        P O Box 50536
        Nashville, TN 37205
        (800) 635-8279

    Galerie Robin puts out a catalog specializing in Jewish art; and
    artistic religious objects and jewelry.  Some of the chanakah menorah
    are not kosher (because the candles are at different heights) and the
    mezusot come with 'paper scrolls' (they should be parchment).  THe cases
    are neat and you could get your own parchment from a real scribe for
    about $25+.  They show the scrolls put in rolled inside out so you can
    see the writing (and with mirrors so you can see the 'paper' all the way
    around)...i am still wondering if that is kosher, even if the mezuzah
    was real parchment and hand written :)


Greenfeld Bros
        Greenfeld Bros. Talitinia Distr.
        5205 13 th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11219
        (800) 336-1210 Out of N.Y.
        (718) 633-8103
        FAX: (718) 438-2846

    Talit, Kippot...big color catalog


Hamafitz
        Hamafitz
        361 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn, N.Y.  11213
        (800) 622-STAM
        (718) 774-0900
        FAX: (718) 221-0642

    Another Place that sells religious articles, mainly.  They have a much
    more limited selection of books.


Hamakor Judaica-The Source for Everything Jewish
        The Source for Everything Jewish
        P.O. Box 48836
        Niles, IL 60714-0836
        (800) 426-2567
        FAX (708) 966-4033

    Art, books, menorahs, shofars, Maccabee Bear T shirts, toys, and the
    like


Heritage
		Heritage
		4908- 13th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 972-5252

	Gifts for all occassions, plus lots of Hebrew Seforim. Will ship, an
	800 number will be forthcoming. Located in Borough Park.


Holy Land Art
		HolyLandArt
		2480-4 Briarcliff Road #311
		Atlanta, Georgia  30329
		(404) 986-6030
		(800) 274-4ART
		(404) 986-8113  (FAX)
		74461.3371@compuserve.com
		http://www.worlplaza.com/aleph1/holyland/holyland.html

    Has a catalog of contemporary inspirational prints based on biblical
    images originally created in felt applique by Jerusalem-based artist
    Bracha Lavee.  Other Jewish objets d'art available.  credit card orders also.
    
		
Jacquelyn International Fashion
        Jacquelyn International Fashion
        Dept. J-H
        15 W. 37th Street
        New York, NY  10018
        (800) 272-2424
        (212) 302-2266

    Wigs.. etc. presumably good ones. Includes human hair wigs...looked
    pretty good, many are in the $300 price range.


Judaica Occassions
		Judaica Occassions
		55 Union Road, Suite 203
		Spring Valley, NY  10977
		(914) 352-9426
		(914) 356-8502 (FAX)
		(800) 336-2291
	
    Large 14 page catalog, mainly of gift items. Nice jewelry


Little Israel
        Little Israel
        392 Harvard St.
        Brookline, MA  02146
        (617) 734-4014
        (617) 566-9646 (FAX)

    Judaica Gifts, Music, including a small section of books (had a shelf
    of used Israeli books).  They sell a nifty watch that has Hebrew
    numberals on it (much nicer than Roman numerals :)  they will ship.


Kosher Klothes
		Kosher Kolthes
		P.O. Box 582
		Mercer Island, WA  98040
		(800) 399-4240

    A family business that makes table clothes, table runners, aporons,
    napkins and kipot out of designs of Jewish interest.  A 52x70" tablecloth
    is $20.00   I have no idea if that is even a good price.


Mah Jongh Company
        Mah Jongh Company (free catalog)
        (800) 821-3029


Merkaz Stam
        Merkaz Stam
        309 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn, N.Y.  11213
        (800) 264-7705
        (718) 773-1120
        FAX: (718) 773-0090

    This store will do mail order; they have Tefillin, Tzitzis, Mezusos,
    books, and Religious articles.  THe prices seemed very good, and they
    are located right in Crown Heights with apparently a decent reputation
    around there.  I have seen their muzzahs and the workmanship looks good.
    They also provide free cases and handy instructions on hanging them.  Muzzas
    start at about $26 (quite good for kosher ones).     Rabbi Y. Mishulovin


Ruth Leah Designs
		Ruth Leah Designs
		Coral Springs, FL  33071-6824
		(800) 752-9323
		(305)753-7872 (fax)

	Custom design of prayer shawls for women, and now also for men.  I've
	seen the glossy photographs of the possible designs that are available
	and will just state flatly that they are incredibly beautiful.  Very
	impressive and one can get the full range of simple elegance to very fancy
	and all sorts of personalized hebrew script and/or embroidery, colors, etc.
	
Sadigh Gallery Ancient Art
        Sadigh Gallery Ancient Art
        303 5th Avenue Suite 1603
        New York, NY 10016
        (800) 426-2007
        (212) 725-7537
        FAX: 212-545-7612

    Sell [authentic] ancient artifacts.  They send regular catalogs and
    take bids on items by mail or phone.


Suggestions
        Suggestions
        P.O. Box 4109
        Highland Park, NJ 0890
        (800) 447-4440

    Hard to find gifts of a general nature.


Weave Alot Studio
        Weave Alot Studio
        RR1 Box 1158
        Troy, ME  04987
        (207) 984-2130

    Handwoven Tallits, Yarmulkes, etc. $2.00 for brochure.


Ziontalis
        Ziontalis
        48 Eldridge St.
        New York, NY 10002
        (212) 925-8558   (call or write for catalog)

    As expected, they sells religious articles and lots of different tallit
    (but I haven't gotten word on the quality of their products yet) They
    sell 'Kosher' mezuzah parchment for $15.00 which seems so cheap I
    question whether it is can really be Kosher or not.


Zust
		Lauren J. Zust
		1753 Alma Street
		Palo Alto, CA  94306
		(415) 326-9725
		ESTHER44@aol.com

    Custom linoleum carving of Hebrew letters by a real sculptor, with a
    MFA from U. Penn! The linoleum blocks are used to make handrubbed in
    prints.  I've seen the photos: some pretty neat stuff.
    
------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: SERVICES, INFORMATION, NEWSPAPERS

first some miscelaneous phone numbers
You can call 1-(800) SAB-BATH to get candlelighting times based on date and
zipcode.  It's all automated.  Use a touchtone phone.  (this one seems to be
disconnected... but there is another number:

You can ask Shabbat shailos (ie. questions)
and get Shabbat hospitality by calling 1-(800) SHA-BBAT.

Try: 1-(800) 4-MOSHIACH to see what happens (ala Chabad :) also, 1-(800)
BE-GOOD-1

*****

Academy of Hebrew Language
        Academy of Hebrew Language
        p.o.b 3449
        Jerusalem 91034
        Israel
        972-2-632-242
        972-2-632-243
    This institution is part of Hebrew Unviversity in Jerusalem,
    Givat Ram


Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith
        Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith
        309 W. Washington
        Chicago, IL 60606


The Archive of Australian Judaica.....
    The Archive provides assistance to researchers from Sydney,
    interstate and overseas - theses writers, authors, film makers etc.
    If you would like any further information please contact: Marianne
    Dacy by phone:  02 692 4162     fax: 02  692 2890   or
      email:   dacy@tmx.mhs.oz.au


Hebrew Publications for Children, Inc.
        Hebrew Publications for Children, Inc.
        110 E. 59th St.  Suite 4100
        New York, NY  10022-1373
        (212) 339-6018

    "Olam Hadash" is the "Illustrated Hebrew Magazine for Children & Youth"
    Annual subscription rate is $12.00 (School Bulk rate available) for
    magazine published monthy from Sept.-May,
    by Hebrew Publications for Children, Inc. in cooperation with the
    Department of Education and Culture of the World Zionist Organization
    and the Jewish National Fund of America.  You can also write to
    the publications department/Jewish Agency at the same address to
    subscribe to "Lamatchil": a vowelled Hebrew bi-weekly newspaper
    published October through June at $12.00/year.


Hillel, 1640 Rhode Island Avenue, NW.  Washington DC, 20036


Histadruth Ivrith of America
        Histadruth Ivrith of America
        Hebrew Language and Culture Association
        47 West 34th Street, Room 609
        New York, NY  10001
        (212) 629-9443
        (212) 629-9472  (FAX)

    This is a really good place to write too.  Among other things
    they publish "Lamishpaha" an illustrate monthly in simple Hebrew
    with a dictionary onf each page. $15/year.  They publish "Hadoar",
    a bi-weekly in Hebrew, and "Tov Lichtov" an international literary
    program that encourages creative writing in Hebrew along with
    various Ulpanim and trips.


Jewish Braille Institute
        Jewish Braille Institute
        110 East 30th Street
        New York, NY  10016

    The Jewish Braille Institute has books in Braille, in large type, and
    on cassette. JBI has the Five Books of Moses in Hebrew,
    English, and Yiddish on cassette, and in H and E in large type and braille
    All of this material is available free-of-charge to those who have
    certification that they are blind, visually impaired or learning disabled
    There is even a Braille Jewish calendar, and a newsletter which
    includes articles from a diverse range of Jewish periodicals and other
    periodicals' material on Jewish topics.  They also need volunteers
    The JBI is non-sectarian, that is, it does not favor or discriminate
    against any stream in Jewish religious, cultural or spiritual life.
    They have a number of different kinds of Passover Haggadahs: plan ahead!
    The JBI also helps students by reproducing textbooks or other
    student books into Large Type, Braille or onto cassette.


Jewish Bulletin of Northern California
        Jewish Bulletin of Northern California
        88 First St. Suite 300
        San Francisco  CA  94105-2522
        (415) 957-9340
        (415) 957-0266  (FAX)

    Jewish newspaper, of general interest, social, or political articles.
    If you subscribe you get the 93 edition of "RESOURCE: A Guide
    to Jewish Life in the Bay Area"


Jewish Children's Adoption Network
		(303) 573-8113


The Jewish Development Company, 18331-C Irvine Blvd.; Tustin CA 192680
        (714) 730-1419


198X Jewish Directory and Almanac, write
        Pacific Press Inc.
        501 Fifth Avenue, Suite 2203
        New York, NY  10017
        212-687-0500

    There are some really great items in here!  (Apparently, this is no longer
    published. the last one I have seen is 1986...i wonder if there are any more
    recent ones The above address is no longer valid)


The Jewish Heritage for the Blind
		The Jewish Heritage for the Blind
		1655 East 24th Street
		Brooklyn, NY  11229


Jewish National Fund (trees) 42 East 69th Street; NCY  10021. (212) 879-9300


Jewish Women's Resource Center, National Council of Jewish Women, New York
    Section, 9 East 69th Street, New York, NY 10021, (212) 535-5900: They
    maintain a library achive materials (for possible research) plus they sell
    a few books by mail, and provide some other local services.


Kashrus Magazine
		Kashrus Magazine
		P.O. Box 204
		Brooklyn NY  11204

    Every year, Kashrus magazine publishes an index
    to all the Kosher symbols and the people behind them.
    The latest index was published in Issue #71, dated
    Kislev 5755, November 1994. Request the "Kosher Supervision Guide"
    issue, number 71.
    The cost is $3.00 for one copy, $2.00 for two to ten copies, and
    $1.50 for 11 to 50 copies.  Better rates for more than 50 copies
    

National Congress of Jewish Deaf, and Jewish Deaf Congress, Inc.
		Judy Slomivic Gunter
		33 South Landing Road
		Rochester, NY  14610
		(716) 387-0762 TTY/Voice
		(716) 387-0763 FAX
		
    Quarterly (Newsletter), Youth retreat, and outreach, archives, dictionary
    of Judaic signs, shabbatons are a few of their activities.


National Jewish Outreach
	National Jewish Outreach
	485 Fifth Avenue, Suite 701
	New York, NY 10017
	(212) 986-7450
	(212) 986-7476  (FAX)
	(800) 44-HEBRE(W)
	(800) 44-TORAH
	(800) MMM-SHAB(BOS) for list of partcipating synagogues

    Off a free Hebrew Reading Crash course at 300 locations around
    the US. Also Crash Course in Basic Judaism, Level II Hebrew Reading
    Course and over 150 Beginners Services around the country.
    check it out!


Outreach Judaism
        Outreach Judaism
        PO Box 789
        Monsey, NY  10952
        (800)-315-5397

    (formerly Jews for Judaism)
    Counter-missionary books, tapes.  Their materials are generally pretty
    informative, even for people who are not amateur counter-missionaries :)
    In particular, the set of tapes of lectures by Rabbi Tovia
    Singer are well worth the $59.  I have heard the lectures live as
    well as the tapes and printed material that accompanies the tapes and
    have found it very well researched.  He has collected information that
    is very hard to find anywhere else.  There are nine tapes that cover
    how missionaries have manipulated the so-called Old Testament with
    mistranslations and misquotations fit their own agenda.  He discusses
    many topics from Sin & Atonement, to Isaiah 53, to other messianic
    passages clearly explaining what the Hebrew actually means and how
    these verses have been historically distorted.
    The following two locations might still be valid:
    National Computer BBS (313) 967-5397
    Jews for Judaism, Box 15059, Baltimore, MD 21208.  (410) 602-0276.
    gopher://shamash.org:70/11/judaica/answers/missionaries
    http://www.utexas.edu/students/cjso/untitled_folder/Truth_page.html

Prayer Hotline to Israel (800) 545-PRAY Rufuah/Yeshuah, 1469 42nd Street,
Brooklyn, NY 11219


Project Genesis
	Project Genesis 
	P.O. Box 1230
	Spring Valley, NY  10977-8230
	(914) 356 - 3040
	(914) 356 - 6722  (FAX)
	Net: genesis@shamash.org

	http://www.torah.org

    They can provide speakers for contemporary Jewish social and political
    issues.  They also operate a number of mailing lists over internet.


Shaar Lematchil
	Shaar Lematchil
	P.O. Box 199
	Tel-Aviv 61001
	Israel

    If you are interested in receiving Sha'ar Lematchil, which is an Israeli
    newspaper written in easy Hebrew: The subscription rate in the U.S. is
    $115 (USD) per year. You can send them a check directly with your name
    and address printed


Shalom Home (800) 8-SHALOM  (help relocating, finding kosher food, schools..)


Simon Wiesenthal Center
        Simon Wiesenthal Center
        9760 West Pico Blvd.
        Los Angeles, CA  90035.

    The Simon Wiesenthal Center is on the lookout for hate propaganda
    including revisionists on the Internet & BBS'es.  If you come
    across any, please let them know immediately.  They can be
    contacted at:

        R.EATON3@GENIE.GEIS.COM


Temple Beth Solomon of the Deaf
        Temple Beth Solomon of the Deaf
        13580 Osborne St.
        Arleta, CA 91331
        (818) 896-6721 TDD
        (818)899-2202  Voice & FAX

    They can send further info to you about finger spelling the Hebrew aleph
    -bet, and a list of Jewish signs used at Temple Beth Solomon, and further
    info.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: FOOD (hopefully Kosher!)


2nd Ave Deli fed-ex's kosher food, including chicken soup.

        (800)  NYC-DELI    (800) 692-3354)

    [I have reports that they stay open on Shabbat, and that some patrons will
    not use this place as a result.  Verify this before you order, if that is
    a concern.  Other reports are that the level
    of supervision in the 2nd Ave Deli is such that it is not generally
    accepted in Orthodox Circles]


Amara Kosher Meats
        Amara Kosher Meats
        89 Washington Place, Suite 200
        New York, NY  10011
        1-800-64AMARA (1-800-642-6727)
        FAX: (212) 388-9443
        (212) 388-9444 (inquires, etc.)

    Large selection of Glatt Kosher meats, poultry shipped anywhere.
    Everything is USDA inspected and Star K supervision of Rabbi
    Heinemann.  Custom orders can be arranged.  24 hour ordering
    (except holidays), items shipped frozen with reusable ice packs
    or dry ice, by UPS or Federal Express.  Shipping is $8.50 per address.
    Of note: Ground beef is $3.49/lb, CHuck Roat $5.59/lb, Turkey Breast
    $3.09, also duck, veal, lamb, deli items available in approximately
    1 to 10 lb lots.


Ben-Ezer (Citrus)
	Ben-Ezer
 	440 Park Avenue 
	NYC, 10016 
	(212) 532-7097

    Need more info on this one.


Empire Kosher Poultry, Inc.
        Empire Kosher Poultry, Inc.
        River Road
        PO Box 165
        Mifflintown, PA  17059-0165
        (717) 436-5921
        (800) 233-7177
        (717) 436-9269 (FAX)

    They sell frozen kosher poultry, and if you give them a call they
    will send you information describing their entire production process,
    noting that the chickens are feed all natural feeds (no hormones,
    anti-biotics or any non-natural feed additives) are free roaming,
    cold water processed (which is believed to cut down on the spead
    of bacterial infections) plus if you request they will send you a
    video tape showing their processing plant etc.  The kashruth is O-U.


Hagafen Cellars
        Hagafen Cellars
        P.O. Box 3035
        Napa, CA  94558
        (707) 252-0781
        (800) 456-VINO

    Premium Napa Valley wines... Orthodox-Union supervision.  Perhaps
    someone can relay what sort of prices and bulk shipping arangements
    they will make.


Harvest Direct
		Harvest Direct
		P.O. Box 4514
		Decatur, IL  62525-4514
		(800) 835-2867

    Kosher food supplier.  give them a call and see what they have
    
    
Isragift (Delivery to Israel) (800) 685-9218  (201) 866-7667
    P.O.B. 654, Union City, NJ 07087  FAX: (201) 601-0842
    Brochure says they deliver goody packages of wine,ligquor,chocolate,
    coffee; prices from $30 to $140.  your relatives may prefer the cash ;-)


The Kosher Connection
        The Kosher Connection
        3195 SW Raleighview Drive
        Portland, OR  97225
        (800) 950-7227

    Gourmet kosher gift baskets delivered in U.S., Canada and Israel.
    Year-round and holiday gifts.  Featuring foods from the Pacific Northwest
    and Israel.  Kof-K supervised.  Free brochure.


Kosher Cornucopia, Ltd.
        Kosher Cornucopia, Ltd. in
        Jeffersonville, Long Island.
        (800) 756-7437

    ask for catalogues of mail-order food baskets.


Kosher Salmon, Cavier, etc. (800) 331-3001
    FAX (904) 222-6525   Scottish Crown, LTD.
    1704 Thomasvill Rd. Suite #115, Tallahassee, FL  32303


Meat Service c/o Mrs Irving Freistat (to Israel)
           1 North Dawes Avenue
           Kingston, PA  18704    717-288-4002


Mrs. Maltz's Knishes, Inc.
        Redwood City, CA 94063
        (800) 875-6474

    Send a dozen kinishes for $19.95, etc....


------------------------------------------------------------------
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES (for adults)

American Zionist Youth Foundation (AZYF)
	American Zionist Youth Foundation
	110 E. 59th St.
	New York, NY  10022
	(212) 339-6916
	(800) 27-ISRAEL
	(212) 755-4781  (FAX)

    Call or write for "the complete guide to the israel experience"
    which is a comprehensive listion of all education Israel programs
    available for Jewish youth between the ages of 12-35.  I cannot vouch
    on how comprehensive it really is, but you do get a nice 80-page book.


Board of Jewish Education
        Board of Jewish Education
        Special Needs Department
        11710 Hunter Lane
        Rockville, MD  20882

    They publish a chart of the Hebrew Alphabet in Sign, and other educational
    materials for special needs.


Drisha Institute
		Drisha Institute for Jewish Education
		131 West 86th Street, 9th Floor
		New York, NY  10024
		(212) 595-0307
		(212) 595-0679  FAX
		drisha@panix.com

	Advanced Jewish Studies for Women: Talmud, bible, Jewish law, 
	philosophy, rabbinics; advanced and beginning.
	Full & Part time, Day & Evening classes.
	

Lubavitch
        Hadar Hatorah, Yeshiva for Men
        824 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn,  NY  11213
        718-735-0250

        Machon Chana, Jewish Women's College
        825 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        718-735-0217

    This is a Baal Tshuvah Yeshiva in Crown Heights Brooklyn
    operated by Chabad.  It has all levels for adults, from the *very*
    beginning to advanced; and is open to all men and women.  It is
    a very open place, one can visit anytime, start and stop anytime,
    flexible pay scale, and they seem to have no pressure there, either
    academic or emotional.  It seems to be one good place for someone
    who wants to learn something (or anything) Jewish...perhaps with
    an exploratory intent; and one need not worry that this place will be
    only for Chabadniks.  Also, during winter vacation (~dec22 - ~jan 2)
    and during spring vacation they have week long programs.


Ohr Somayach
        Ohr Somayach
        Tanenbaum Educational Center
        244 Route 306
        P.O. Box 334
        Monsey, NY  10952
        (914) 425-1370
        (914) 425-8865 (FAX)
	1-800-Ohr-Somayach 
	ohr@j51.com  (e-mail)

    I don't have much information about this school.  Their promo
    says relaxed, non-judgmental format...  and they also have a winter
    10 day program from about dec 22- jan 2  in addition to their regular
    classroom sessions.  Send them a postcard and check it out!


Shalom Torah Centers
        Shalom Torah Centers
        P.O. Box 1545
        Lakewood, NJ.  08701
        (908) 363-5700
        (908) 363-5789 (FAX)

    Lots of interesting programs; and 5 different New Jersey locations.
    Evening classes, crash courses in Torah, Hebrew, customs, history, etc.

Yeshivath Beth Moshe
        Yeshivath Beth Moshe
        P.O.B. 1141
        930 Hickory St.
        Scranton, PA  18505
        (717) 346-1747

%%%EndText



From shamash.org!faigin  Fri Oct 27 17:00:07 2000
Return-Path: <real-kat>
Received: by welkin.apana.org.au (Linux Smail3.2.0.101 #1)
	id m13p2Yg-000OVsC; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 17:00:06 +1100 (EST)
Received: from mate.pobox.com (mate.pobox.com [208.210.124.44])
	by hydrogen.apana.org.au (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id NAA05104
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Fri, 27 Oct 2000 13:22:01 +1000
Received: from mate.pobox.com (localhost [127.0.0.1])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with ESMTP id 261BF7A15E
	for <kat@welkin.apana.org.au>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:12 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from shamash.org (shamash3.shamash.org [207.244.122.42])
	by mate.pobox.com (Postfix) with SMTP id ED8DF7A139
	for <kat@foobox.net>; Thu, 26 Oct 2000 23:21:07 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (qmail 28071 invoked by uid 108); 27 Oct 2000 03:25:32 -0000
Date: 27 Oct 2000 03:25:32 -0000
Message-ID: <20001027032532.28070.qmail@shamash.org>
To: kat@foobox.net
From: archives@scjfaq.org
X-Handled-By: Id: mrj.shamash.autoresp 2.35 2000/07/01 12:42:26 faigin Exp  
Subject: Request for FAQ: mail-order
Sender: faigin@shamash.org
Status: RO
Content-Length: 94792
Lines: 2898

%%%StartText

Newsgroups: soc.culture.jewish,soc.answers,news.answers,soc.culture.israel
Subject: soc.culture.jewish FAQ: Jewish Resources by Mail-order and Computer
Followup-To: poster
Distribution:
Summary: Provides information on mail-order books, book publishers, book
        stores, videos, religious articles, software, services, etc.

Archive-name: judaism/mail-order
Posting-Frequency: Monthly

                 Jewish Resources by Mail-order and Computer
         [Last Change: $Date: 1999/02/04 19:07:06 $ $Revision: 5.6 $]
                    [Last Post: Thu Mar 31 11:07:08 1994]

This posting contains a list of sources for various Jewish resources. Please
e-mail any additions or corrections  or requests for updates to Mordechai
Steve Seidman <srs3@cornell.edu>.

The resources discussed are arranged by subject as follows:
(entries within each section are now alphabetized)

   JEWISH BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER
   PUBLISHERS OF RELIGIOUS BOOKS (many have mail-order catalogs too)
   GENERAL BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER (helpful for finding books)
   HEBREW SOFTWARE, Hebrew Wordprocessors, Hebrew Literature on disk, etc.
   VIDEOS, TAPES, MUSIC etc.
   RELIGIOUS ARTICLES, tallit, kipot, challah covers, pre-fab sukkah, art..
   FOOD (hopefully Kosher!)
   EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES (for adults)

Note: not all of the comments are mine.  Many people helped to contribute
to this FAQ, and if anyone (including people who have already contributed
but whom i have unfortunately failed to include) does want to be
listed in the acknowledgements, send me your name, and I will include it.
Contributions made by: Mike Singer, Daniel Faigin, Evelynn Leeper, Jack Love,
Josh Backon, Robert D Hoberman, Arieh Lebowitz, Susan Doore, Michael Schulman,
Burton J. Francis (Dovie), Rabbi Tovia Singer, Aaron Peromsik, Judy Balint
Rabbi Eli Silberstein, Eric Marx, Simon Streltsov, Paul Helinski,
Chana Silberstein

In general, 1-800's can be obtained from 1-800-555-1212 (information)

This posting is organized as a digest, and should be undigestifyable by
software such as Gnus or rn.  Please report any difficulties.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: Archival and Credits

  Anonymous FTP:
  
   All portions of the FAQ and of the reading lists are archived on
   shamash.org and on rtfm.mit.edu, and are available for anonymous FTP.
   On shamash.org, the parts of the FAQ are stored in the
   listarchives/scj-faq/FAQ directory. On rtfm.mit.edu, these FAQs are
   stored in the pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/FAQ directory. Note that
   the archived versions of the FAQ are the posted versions; that is,
   they are each one large ASCII file. A more reliable way to retrieve
   these files is through the FAQ autoretriever, located at
   <http://www.pacificnet.net/~faigin/MLJ/bin/autoresp.cgi>.
   
   The following is the mapping of sections to files:
   
   01-FAQ-intro
          Section 1: Network and Soc.Culture.Jewish Information
          
   02-Who-We-Are
          Section 2: Who We Are
          
   03-Torah-Halacha
          Section 3: Torah
          Section 4: Halachic Authority
          
   04-Observance
          Section 5: Jewish Holidays
          Section 6: Jewish Dietary Law and Kashrut
          Section 7: Sabbath and Holiday Observance
          Section 8: Woman and Marriage
          
   05-Worship
          Section 9: Jewish Worship
          Section 10: Conversion, Intermarriage, and "Who is a Jew?"
          Section 11: Miscellaneous Practice Questions
          
   06-Jewish-Thought
          Section 12: Jewish Thought
          
   07-Jews-As-Nation
          Section 13: Jews as a Nation
          
   08-Israel
          Section 14: Jews and Israel
          
   09-Antisemitism
          Section 15: Churban Europa (The Holocaust)
          Section 16: Antisemitism and Rumors about Jews
          Section 17: Countering Missionaries
          
   10-Reform
          Section 18: Reform/Progressive Judaism
          
   11-Miscellaneous
          Section 19: Miscellaneous
          Section 20: References and Getting Connected
          
   12-Kids
          Section 21: Jewish Childrearing Related Questions
          
   mail-order
          Mail Order Judaica
          
   On shamash.org, the parts of the reading lists are stored in the
   listarchives/scj-faq/reading-lists directory. On rtfm.mit.edu, the
   reading lists are stored in the
   pub/usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists directory. Note that the
   archived versions of the reading lists are the posted versions; that
   is, they are each one large ASCII file.
   
   The following is the mapping of reading lists to files:
   
   general
          Introduction and General. Includes book sources, starting
          points for beginners, starting points for non-Jewish readers,
          General Judaism, General Jewish Thought, General Jewish
          History, Noachide Laws, Torah and Talmud, Mishnah and Talmud,
          Torah and Talmudic Commentary, Midrash, Halachic Codes,
          Becoming An Observant Jew, Women and Judaism, and Science and
          Judaism.
          
   traditional
          Traditional Liturgy, Practice, Lifestyle, Holidays. Includes
          Traditional Liturgy; Traditional Philosophy and Ethics; Prayer;
          Traditional Practice; The Household; Life, Death, and
          In-Between; and The Cycle Of Holidays.
          
   mysticism
          Kabbalah, Mysticism, and Messianism. Includes Academic and
          Religious treatments of Kabbalah, Sprituality, and the Jewish
          notion of the Messiah.
          
   reform
          Reform/Progressive Judaism
          
   conservative
          Conservative Judaism
          
   reconstructionist
          Reconstructionist Judaism
          
   humanistic
          Humanistic Judaism (Society for Humanistic Judaism)
          
   chasidism
          Chassidism. Includes general information on historical
          chassidism, as well as specific information on Lubavitch
          (Chabad), Satmar, Breslaw (Breslov), and other approaches.
          
   zionism
          Zionism. Includes Zionism and The Development Of Israel, The
          Founders, Zionistic Movements, and Judaism in Israel.
          
   antisemitism
          Antisemitism. Includes sections on Antisemitism, What Led to
          The Holocaust, Medieval Oppression, Antisemitism Today
          (Including Dealing with Hate Groups), Judaism and Christianity,
          and Judaism, Freemasonry and other rumors.
          
   intermarriage
          Intermarriage. Includes sections on "So You're Considering
          Intermarriage?", The Traditional Viewpoint, Conversion, and
          Coping With Life As An Intermarried.
          
   periodicals
          Periodicals. Includes Topical General Interest Periodicals,
          General Interest Periodicals focused on Tradition and Home,
          General Interest Periodicals focused on Jewish Scholarship,
          Other General Interest Periodicals, Publications Targeted For
          Specific Movements, Rabbinic Journals, and Local Publications.
          
   childrens
          Books for Jewish Children. Includes.
          
  Mail:
  
   The files may also be obtained via Email by sending a message to
   faigin@shamash.org with any number of the following commands in the
   body of the mail message:
   
   send faq portionnames
   send rl portionnames
   
   The "send faq" version is used to obtain portions of the FAQ; the
   "send rl" version is used to obtain portions of the reading list.
   "portionnames" should be replaced by the names of the files to be
   retrieved, separated by spaces. The special file name "list" will
   retrieve a list of all files that make up the FAQ or reading list; the
   special file name "all" will retrieve all files on the appropriate
   list.
   
   Examples:
   send faq all
   send faq list
   send faq 01-FAQ-intro
   send rl all
   send rl general
   
   Alternatively, you may send a message to mail-server@rtfm.mit.edu with
   the following line in the body of the message:
   
   send usenet/news.answers/judaism/(portionname)
   
   Where (portionname) is replaced by the appropriate subdirectory and
   filenames; for example, to get the first part of the reading list, one
   would say:
        send usenet/news.answers/judaism/reading-lists/general

  WWW:
  
   The FAQ and reading lists are available as a full hypertext tree on
   shamash.org. The URL is:
   
   http://www.shamash.org/lists/scj-faq/HTML/index.html

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: JEWISH BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER


Afikomen
        Afikomen
        3042 Claremont
        Berkeley CA
        (510) 655-1977.


Ari's Judaica Treasures
		Ari's Judaica Treasures
		4514-11th Ave.
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 438-5200
		(800) 359-5578
		(718) 438-3266
		ari@wynn.com
		http://www.wynn.com/arijudacia

	Lots of interesting items.


Bob and Bob
        Bob and Bob
        151 Forest Ave
        Palo Alto CA
        (415) 329-9050.


Eric Chaim Kline Bookseller
        Eric Chaim Kline Bookseller
        1343 4th
        Santa Monica CA
        (310) 395-4747

    This bookstore specializes in a good collection of Judiaca and art
    books, but also has lots of other used books.  The owner constantly goes
    to book conventions and buys rare collections.


Gozlan's Sefer Israel Inc.
        Gozlan's Sefer Israel, Inc.
        28 West 27th Street, Suite 402
        New York, NY  10001
        (212) 725-5890
        (212) 689-6534 (FAX)

    Importers of Israeli Books and Judaica.  I have had good experience
    with this importer, and have ordered the *excellent* Rav Milon
    Hebrew-Hebrew-English dictionary from them (the one with hebrew & english
    definitions, and hebrew sample sentence) at a good price, prompt service.
    They have a list of about 29 texts, tapes, videos on Hebrew language
    instruction graded at six different levels of instruction.  This seems
    like a good place to look for serious Hebrew educational materials.


Israel Book Shop
        Israel Book Shop, Inc.
        410 Harvard Street
        Brookline, MA  02146
        (617) 566-7113
        (800) 323-7723

    Israel Book Shop has a catalog, but you can call the store to ask for
    the many items not listed in the catalog.  Their catalog concentrates
    mainly on Judaica Press, Soncino, and Metsudah (publishers of the famous
    interlinear Chumash, Siddur, Haggadah, Kitsur Shulchan Aruch,etc.  Those
    interlinear books can be a real nice aid in checking up on your Hebrew)


Lekutei
        The Montrose Corp., Lekutei
        c/o Yitzchok Rosenberg
        10 West 47th Street, Room 503
        New York, NY  10036
        (212) 719-1717

    THey have 20 volumes of Lekutei, all in Hebrew: Torah (7 volumes),
    Pirkei Avoth (2 vol), Agudas H'Shas (5 vol), Tehilim (2vol),
    Midrash Raba (3 vol), Megilot ( 1 vol).  Only $8.00 per volume + shipping.


Jerusalem Books, Ltd.
        Jerusalem Books, Ltd.
        P.O. Box 18189
        Jerusalem 91181
        ISRAEL
        +972 2-850858

    This is the only Israeli mail order book store I have dealt with,
    although no doubt there are others.  The prices are not cheap, but the
    selection is pretty good.  They have Hebrew and English titles published
    in Israel.


Jewish Book Center of the Workmen's Circle
        Jewish Book Center of the Workmen's Circle
        45 E 33rd btwn Park & Madison Avenues
        New York NY
        (212) 889-6800 x285
        (800) 922-2558

    Judaica and Jewish books in English and Yiddish.


Jewish Book Club
        Jewish Book Club
        P.O. Box 25022
        Lehigh Valley, PA 18003-9892
        (215) 437-2159

    Nice book club; there are no mininum requirements for purchasing.
    THeir benefit is that if you buy one book at regular member price
    you may also order something from the SPecial Discount Selection
    at savings up to 95% off.

Jewish Book Club
		The Jewish Book Club
		230 Livingston Street
		Northvale, N.J. 07647

	They do have mininum requirements for purchasing.


The Jewish Bookstore Of Greater Washington
        The Jewish Bookstore Of Greater Washington
        11250 Georgia Avenue
        Wheaton, Maryland  20902
        (301) 942-2237

    This bookstore is run by a delightful father/son team who have been in
    the same location for many many years and have filled a double-store
    front area with about every imaginable title covering all corners of
    Judaica. They also stock quite a wide array of gifts, and Jewish novelty
    items. I'd love to see them get as many customers as their fine and
    complete inventory deserves!
    Proprietors: Joshua & Menachem Youlus: "If it's Jewish, we have it"


Jonathan David Co., Inc.
        Jonathan David Co., Inc.
        68-22 Eliot Ave.
        Middle Village, NY  11379

    Judaica Book Guide: 718-456-8611 FAX:718-894-2818. Call or write for a
    free book guide--no obligation to order. Many good deals. All
    major publishers represented. Steinsaltz for $36/volume.  etc.

Judaica Express
		Judaica Express
		(800) 2-BOOKS-1

	Ask for Shmulie Epstein and see if they keep to their advertisement
	of the lowest discounts around.

Judaica World of Crown Heights, Inc.
        Judaica World of Crown Heights, Inc.
        329 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        (718) 604-1020
        (718) 771-3449  FAX
        (888) 2-JUDAIC
        http://www.judaica-world.com
        judaica@judaica-world.com

    This place has a rather extensive book selection, inluding
    Russian/Hebrew and Spanish/Hebrew.  They sell
    that are reasonably priced. Worldwide shipping, major credit cards
accepted.
    They also have good range of seforim, tallitim, etc.
    I've had good experience with this place.


Levine Jewish Books and Judaica
        Levine Jewish Books and Judaica
        5 W 30th btwn 5th & 6th Avenues
        New York,  NY
        212-695-6888

Lisbon's Hebrew Books & Gifts
	Lisbon's Hebrew Books & Gifts
	2305 University Blvd., West
	Wheaton, Maryland 20902
	(301) 933-1800  (Chai!)
	(301) 933-7466  FAX

    Fine collection of jewish books, invitations, yarmulkes, supplies, etc.
    Happily does mail order world-wide. Nice people!


Ma'ayan Book Company, Inc.
        Ma'ayan Book Company, Inc.
        PO Box 2118
        Woburn, MA  01888
        (800) 262-2926
        (617) 938-6001
        (617) 938-6002 (FAX)


Merkaz Stam
        Merkaz Stam
        309 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn, N.Y.  11213
        (800) 264-7705
        (718) 773-1120
        FAX: (718) 773-0090

    This store will do mail order; they have Tefillin, Tzitzis, Mezusos,
    books, and Religious articles.  THe prices seemed very good, and they
    are located right in Crown Heights with apparently a decent reputation
    around there.  I have seen their mezuzahs and the workmanship looks good.
    They also provide free cases and handy instructions on hanging them.
Muzzas
    start at about $26 (quite good for kosher ones).     Rabbi Y. Mishulovin


National Yiddish Book Center
        National Yiddish Book Center
        48 Woodbridge Street
        South Hadley, MA  01075
        Tel: (413) 535-1303
        Fax: (413) 5351007

        another possibly newer address:

        Old East Street School
        Amherst, MA  01002
        (413) 256-1241

    They are dedicated to saving Yiddish books (as well as seeing that they
    are where people can read them, not just in a warehouse).  They also
    keep members informed of various Yiddishkeit events around the country
    and the world.  (They even have a Yiddish linotype machine they saved
    from the wrecking crew!)  You can join them an get some magazine
    subcriptions and other benefits


Pinsker's Book Store
    1-800-JUDAISM is a good source to Pinsker's Book Store in Pittsburgh
    They may also sell a variety of non-book Jewish items over the phone,
    but not listed in their catalog.  Free shipping on orders over $125.
    Their catalog is a useful resource in itself.  Prices tend to be good,
    and they seem to have a constant sale price on Acalays 5 volume Hebrew
    dictionary (something anyone serious on Hebrew should be at least aware
    of this dictionary)

        America's Jewish Bookstore
        2028 Murray Avenue,
        Pittsburgh, PA  15217
        (800) 538-2476 (In USA)
        (800) 776-9545 (In Canada)
        (412) 421-6103 (FAX)
        http://www.judaism.com

    They now have e-mail too: info@judaism.com. There is also a new
    gopher site: judaism.com.  The gopher gives you access to Pinskers Book
    Store in Pittsburgh and electronic direct marketing.


Ranaan Enterprises
        Ranaan Enterprises
        1096 Sparrow Rd.
        Jenkintown, PA  19046

    Judaica for children, books, cassettes, etc.  Free catalog.


Rosenblum's World of Judaica
        Rosenblum's World of Judaica
        2906 W Devon
        Chicago IL
        (312) 262-1700
        (800) 626-6536

    They put out a newsletter.  Call to inquire about books.


S. Goldman - Otzar Haseferim
        S.Goldman - Otzar Haseferim
        125 Ditmas Avenue
        Brooklyn, NY  11218
        (718) 972-6200
        (718) 972-6204  (FAX)

    This company sells books published by Soncino Press and Judaica Press
    (including a translation of Mikraoth Gedolot), and other works, such as
    Igrot Moshe of R. Feinstein.


Sepher Hermon Press.
        Sepher Hermon Press, Inc.
        1265 46th St.
        Brooklyn, NY  11219
        (718) 972-9010

    Sepher Hermon Press does mail-order, popular, scholarly & academic
    books, and will research special requests.  They are the distributors of
    The Jewish Travel Guide ($12 +$2shipping). It lists kosher restaurants,
    hotels, mikvaot, etc. all over the world.


Shoroshim Russian Judaica Resource Center
        Shoroshim Russian Judaica Resource Center
        1566 Coney Island Ave
        Brooklyn NY  11230
        (718) 692-0079
        (718) 252-5159 (FAX)

    This places specializes in Russian/Hebrew Jewish literature.
    161 Titles; good selection; Torah, Tania, Jewish Literacy, much more


Shvut Ami
	Shvut Ami
	10 Belilius St
	PO Box 6141,jerusalem

    Director: Rabbi Randy Eaton, they sell serious Russian books.
    They have a US "Friends of Shvut Ami", that's mostly the fundraising arm:

	Suite 3ES, 1025 5th Avenue
	New York, NY 10028
	(212) 249-0142


Tree of Life Book Club
        Tree of Life Book Club
        PO Box 115
        Boston, MA  02258
        (800) 360-TREE
        (617) 558-2700
        (617) 558-7651 (FAX)
        shalombk@treelife.com
        http://www.shore.net/~shalombk

    They have a catalog of about 130 books.


United Synagogue Book Service
        United Synagogue Book Service
        155 Fifth Avenue
        New York, NY 10010
        (212) 533-7800 x2003
        (212) 353-9439  FAX
		71263.333@compuserver.com
		http://www.uscj.org

    In addition to books published by United Synagogue, the Rabbinical
    Assembly, and the Jewish Theological Seminary, they also carry a small
    selection of books from other publishers, including the Steinsaltz
    Talmud ($36) and the JPS Torah Commentaries ($38).  Nice catalog, and
    includes lots of good Hebrew story books geared towards children with
    250 word vocabularies.  These are among the least expensive childrens
    Hebrew story books I have found.


also see:  (I need further info on this one)
WEST SIDE JUDAICA AT 2412 BROADWAY (89TH STREET) , MANHATTAN, (212-362-7846),
HAS A LARGE SELECTION OF HEBREW DICTIONARIES.


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: PUBLISHERS OF RELIGIOUS BOOKS (most have mail-order catalogs too)


AD  (An Israeli publishing company)
        AD
        18 Omri St.
        Tel Aviv, tel. 03-6481605

    They sell *great* modern Hebrew dictionar(ies) by Liora Weinbach
    and Edna Lauden.  In Libraries the name may be transliterated as
    "Li'orah Vainbakh".  Look for "Multidictionary: Bilingual Learners
    Dictionary; Hebrew-Hebrew-English, English-Hebrew" Hebrew title:
    "Rav Milon".  ISNB 965-390-003-x.  This dictionary includes hebrew
    definitions, sample sentences, gender and plural information plus
    English index.  They also give spellings of words in the full
    and partial orthography (ie. with and without nikud so you can see
    where those pesky yuds and vavs get added) and mark which syllable
    is stressed if it isn't the default last syllable.  other goodies too
    numerous to list.

    They also put out an a dictionary just like this but
    in Russian-English-Hebrew with Russian index. (ISNB 965-390-009-9)
    It is also called "Rav Milon" in English; so don't confuse the two
    when ordering.  THe Hebrew sections in both dictionaries are
    identical.  The latter dictionary has the index in Russian only.

    For beginners the same busy authors put out an abbreviated version
    of the above dictionary called "+2000, A dictionary for Learners
    of Hebrew".  The one i have is English-Hebrew-Amhari and indexed
    in Amhari in the back  (obviously designed for Ethiopian immigrants).
    It will still be useful to English speakers, but perhaps they put
    out a Hebrew-English (only) version.  Anyway this one for Ethiopians
    is ISBN 965-390-08-0.

    I have yet to find any other dictionaries that come even close to
    these in educational value.

    I have found that Gozlan's Sefer Israel is a good importer to obtain
    this book in the USA.


Artscroll/Mesorah Publications, Ltd.
    You can get Artscroll/Mesorah books directly from Artscroll:

        Mesorah Publications, Ltd.
        4401 Second Ave.
        Brooklyn, NY  11232

        (800) MESORAH (outside of New York State)
        (718) 921-9000 (in NYS)
        (718) 680-1875 (FAX)

    Write to them and ask for a catalog.  They have many items in paperback.
    A 10% discount on items ordered directly from them seems typical.  They
    are the famous publishers of The Artscroll Tanach Series, and the
    Schottenstein Talmuds (which might be at least as good for beginners and
    advanced students as the Steinsaltz Talmud... they are certainly *much*
    less expensive, and still have line by line translation and extensive
    footnotes) Many people recommend the Schottenstein over the Steinsaltz.
    Your mileage may vary.


Avotaynu, Inc.
		Avotaynu, Inc.
        P.O. Box 1134
        Teaneck, NJ  07666

    Send them a postcard, and see what you get.  They publish a great book
    Called "Jewish Personal Names" by Rabbi Shmuel Gorr.  Has lots of good
    Jewish references in it besides just being a trendy catalog of names.


Board of Jewish Education
		Board of Jewish Education of Greater New York
		426 West 58th Street
		New York, NY  10019-1102
		(212) 245-8200
		(212) 586-9579  (FAX)
		(212) 247-1957  (FAX)
		(212) 664-7976  (FAX)

   	THey put out some really great inexpensive educational materials.
    Of particular merit is the 224pg book "Haftarah Chanting" by Pinchas
    Spiro (2 optional companion tapes).(revised
    edition now available)  This book has instruction on
    Torah trope, haftarah reading, along with tropes for high holidays
    and all the other Megillahs (Esther, Eicha, etc)  and flash cards.
    Supposedly the best and most comprehensive book of this nature.
    Geared for Bar/Bat Mitzvah students.


Board of Jewish Education of Greater Washington
		Board of Jewish Education of Greater Washington
		Lehrman Community Services Building
		11710 Hunters Lane
		Rockville, MD  20852
		(301) 984-4455
		(301) 984-1670  TTY
		(301) 230-0267  FAX


    Educational materials and activities for the Jewish deaf.  They provide
    interpreter training, signs for the Jewish holidays and prayers, etc.


Breslov Research Institute

        NORTH AMERICA:
        Breslov Research Institute
        POB 587
        Monsey, NY 10952-0587
        (914) 425-4258
        (800) 33-breslov   for orders
        (914) 425-3018  (FAX)

        ISRAEL:
        Breslov Research Institute
        POB 5370
        Jerusalem, Israel
        02-824-641
        02-825-542 (FAX)

        EUROPE:
        Breslov Research Institute
        33, Waterpark Road
        Salford, M7 0FT
        Manchester, England
        061-795-1251
        061-795-2331  (FAX)

        AUSTRALIA:
        Breslov Research Institute
        c/o Uri Ben-Avraham
        45b Portland Street
        Dover Heights, NSW, 2030
        02-371-9850
        02-264-8792  (FAX)

    They sell some amazing (lesser know) Aryeh Kaplan books.  Who knows
    what other gems they may have.  Lots of books by Rebbe Nachman, of
    course.  Items in French and Spanish too.  They have a mail order catalog.


CIS Publishers & Distributors
        CIS Publishers & Distributors
        180 Park Ave.
        Lakewood, NY  08701
        (908) 905-3000
        (908) 367-6666 (FAX)
	(800) CIS-9003 (Priveledged Readers Membership Club)  [this # no
longer in use]
	(800) 9-FAX-CIS  (FAX)

	CIS International (Israel)
	Rechov Mishkalov 18
	Har Nof,  Jerusalem
	Tel: 02-518-935

	CIS International (UK)
	89 Craven Park Road
	London N15 6AH
	England
	Tel: 81-809-3723

    Lots of really good books, tapes, videos, games .  Besides CIS publications
    they have a lot of stuff from Sepher-Harmon press and a few other
    publishers.  They have 18+ different Jewish travel guides... most
    complete selection I've seen anywhere.  They have no shipping charges
    on any order over $60, or 5 or more books.  Several levels of membership
    available offering 10% - 30% discounts.  Large selection of childrens'
    books too.


CCAR Press
        Central Conference of American Rabbis
        192 Lexington Avenue
        New York, NY  10016-6801
        (800) 935-CCAR
        (212) 684-4990
        (212) 689-1649 (FAX)

    Books (including Haggadah's, Siddur's, American Reform Responsa) from
    a Reform perspective.  They have a 'gender-sensitive edition' of their
    siddur.  Free shipping and handling on pre-paid orders over $50.00,
    otherwise add 15%.


Duben Books
        Duben Books
        405 West California Street
        Urbana, Illinois

    They sell a *great* 3 volume work book series called "Israeli Hebrew
    for Speakers of English" c 1978, by Gad Ben-Horin, et al. Series
    is Peter Cole.  Address all comments to

        Professor Peter Cole
        Department of Linguistics
        University of Illinois
        Urbana, Illinois  61801

    These books are not self contained but are a great addition for any
    course on modern Hebrew, and can be used for self study if combined
    with a suitable grammar book.  The big advantage of this book is that
    they start to acclimate the student to reading Hebrew *without* the
    nikud from the very beginning.  This is an important skill to develop
    and turns out not to be such a big deal providing that the student
    gets used to reading Hebrew without nikud early in their education.


EKS Publishing Co.
        EKS Publishing Co.
        5346 College Avenue
        Oakland, CA  94618
        (510) 653-5183
        (510) 653-0350 (FAX)

    They produce a number of well known adult (and childrens) Hebrew
    learning materials.  In particular "The First Hebrew Primer, 3rd ed."
    "Prayer Book Hebrew the Easy Way" along with some tapes to help
    one learn pronouciation.  The books have good and simple
    explanations of grammar and reading comprehension; and are suitable for
    self-study, and remedial work.  Mail-order catalog available.


Feldheim Publishers
        Feldheim Publishers
        200 Airport Executive Park
        Spring Valley, NY 10977
        (800) 237-7149
        (914) 425-1908 (FAX)

    Feldheim publishes contemporary Orthodox and Jewish classic books,
    including the English translations of the Kehati Mishnah commentary and
    the Mishnah Berurah.  They publish the Hebrew textbook "Ha-Yesod" by
    by Luba Uveeler, N. Broznick which is a particularly good book for
    self-study of Hebrew.  This book starts from the beginning and is
    comprehensive and self-contained.


Hebrew Publishing Company
        Hebrew Publishing Company
        P.O. Box 157
        Rockaway Beach, NY 11693
        (718) 945-3000
        (718) 945-3063

    They produce many Hebrew books and educational materials. Of particular
    merit is a thin paperback called "the Yiddish Teacher" by H. E. Goldin.


Jason Aronson Publishers

    The Jason Aronson Publishers' Judaica catalog is now online
    on the World Wide Web.  Use Mosaic, Lynx, or any other WWW
    browser to access the URL: http://www.aronson.com/clients/aronson/
    At the moment, the catalog only contains brief descriptions
    of all of the books.  We will soon be adding author interviews.
    You can order books online by sending email to orders@aronson.com
    Jason Aronson, Inc. is a publisher of books in Judaica and
    psychotherapy based in NJ.  Here is another place to look
    http://www.flightpath.com/Clients/Aronson/Judaica/titles


Jewish Publication Society
        Jewish Publication Society
        O,Neill Highway
        Dunmore PA  18512
        (800) 355-1165
        FAX (717) 348-9297

    They sell direct, and also have a membership (which seems not to
    really cost anything or have sign up fees that offers a small discount)
    They have a large number of childrens books.  They have also published
    the famous "New JPS" Tanakh translation (one of the few English
    translations of the whole tanakh in one volume.  Most other publishers
    will have multi-volume editions of the Tanahk.  The older JPS (c 1917)
    translation was a slightly modified KJV (King James Version) and proved
    rather inadequate.  The new translation is to rectify some of those
    problems, but some consider the results to be iffy.  Secular academics
    tend to like it.  Your mileage may vary!  I would say the translation
    reads well, the English is fluid, but they put sentences toghether in
    various ways that make this book less suitable as an aid Hebrew study.
    Other translations might be better suited for that goal.  Still this
    book will also be a valuable study aid.


Joseph Simon, publisher
        Joseph Simon, publisher
        P.O. Box 4071
        Malibu, CA  90265
        (800) 338-8122  credit card orders onl
        (310) 457-3293  orders.
        (310) 457-1601  FAX orders

    They publish a good book for learning Yiddish called, obviously,
    "Learning Yiddish, in easy stages" by Marvin Zuckerman.
     Write for a Mail-order catalog.

    The address of Marion Herbst will provide an answer booklet and a
    tape to accompany this book.  good luck!

        Marion Herbst
        1311 N. Kenter Avenue
        Los Angeles, CA 90049


Judaica Press, Inc.
		Judaica Press, Inc.
		(800) 872-6201
		(718) 972-6200
		JudaicaPr@aol.com


Kehot Publication Society
        Kehot Publication Society
        770 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY 11213
        (718) 774-4000

    Publisher for the Chabad-Lubavitch Movement: many publications in
    English for children and adults, as well as in Hebrew, Yiddish, French,
    Spanish and Russian. Chabad has its own host on Internet and also has a
    gopher site. Publications on line and also listserv for weekly, daily or
    general material.  Gopher lubavitch.chabad.org or telnet 199.26.225.2
    and login as gopher and no password. (terminal should be set to vt-100
    or equivalent). On web http://132.197.9.38:7700/chabad/chabad.html
    or  http://www.utexas.edu/students/cjso/Chabad/chabad.html
    or  http://www.utexas.edu/students/cjso/index.html

		Central Organization for Jewish Outreach
		383 Kingston Avenue, Suite #132
		Brooklyn, NY  11213
		(718) 953-2444
		(718) 953-2445
		cojo@chabad.org

    In particular, you can check out Chabad-Lubavitch in Cyberspace through
    this central organization.

    Their retail bookstore is at:

        Merkos Books
        291 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn,  NY  11213
        (718) 778-0226
        (718) 778-4148 (FAX)

    They take phone in orders via credit cards and also have a book club
    that will send you new books as they are published at a 45% discount
    off the already low retail price.  Write for details about opening
    an account with them if interested.  I have phoned in orders to them
    when they have their booksales and recieved good service.

    They also produce a number of very good cassette tapes that can be
    ordered from

        SICHOS in English
        788 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        (718) 778-5436

	Another Chabad publisher (of the famous resource guide for
	Chabad shluchim (by Rabbi Greenburg)

		Nshei Ubnos Chabad
		398 Kingston Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11225
		(718) 498-1773
		(718) 604-0594 (FAX)


Keren Aniyim
        Keren Aniyim
        1314 Avenue J
        P.O.B. 443
        Brooklyn, NY  11230
        (718) 951-1010

    Need further info on this one.  they might produce the Metsudah
    series.


Ktav Publishing House
        Ktav Publishing House
        900 Jefferson Street
        Hoboken NJ  07030-7205
        (201) 963-9524
        FAX (201) 963-0102

    Ktav also has a Jewish Gift Catalog, mostly items for children.  They
    want $2.00 for the catalog; but if you make order over $25.00 within 3
    months, they will credit you the $2.00.  Many of their books have
    a slightly more academic orientation.  They have some sort of
    affiliation with Yeshiva University, I believe  (perhaps someone
    has some good information about this)  btw:  I ordered their catalog
    which was a nice list of what they published, but for ordering they
    simply gave the phone number of 1-800-JUDAISM; so it seems that
    Pinsker's in Pittsburgh is distributing their books for them.


Langenscheidt Publishers, Inc.
        Langenscheidt Publishers, Inc.
        46-35 54th Road, Maspeth
        New York, NY  11378

    They sell a good pocket Hebrew dictionary for about $10 that
    contains 8,000 entries that supposedly covers the entire vocabulary
    of the 'Old Testament' (sic).  It is by Dr. Karl Feyerabend; and
    seems to be about the best Biblical Hebrew dictionary around.
    The book contains plural, gender, & contstruct forms of many if not
    most of the entries.  Very convenient to use.  Exercise caution when
    using this dictionary to research controversial words, however.


Mendelsohn Press, Inc.
		Mendelsohn Press, Inc.
		738 Lefferts Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11203
		(718) 467-1957
		(718) 778-5918 (FAX)

	Their highlight is a coffee table formatted book called "And He
Will Redeem Us"
	All about the Lubavitcher Rebbe.  Lots of conversational tidibits,
speeches, sichot,
	essays and pictures.


Moznaim Publishing Corp.
        Moznaim Publishing Corp.
        4304 12th Avenue
        Brooklyn NY  11219
        (718) 438-7680 or (718) 853-0525
        FAX (718) 438-1305

    They publish the Me'Am Le'Oz Tanakh commentaries and are translating
    Rambam's Mishnah Torah (Rabbi Touger).  Many other great publications.


Orthodox Union/NCSY Publications
        Orthodox Union/NCSY Publications  (good books from Aryeh Kaplan!)
        333 Seventh Ave.
        New York, NY  10018
        (212) 563-4000 (phone for OU)

    A complete publications catalogue and volume discounts available.
    They sent me the Artscroll Library cataglog (10% discount)


Robinson Books
	Robinson Books
	31 Nachlat Benjamin St.
	Tel-Aviv 65162  Israel

	Address all mail to:

	Robinson Books
	P.O.B. 4308
	Tel Aviv 65162  Israel

   They put out catalog(s) (4 different subscription catalogs containing
books from
   4 categories: New titles, Rabbinca, Monthly selection of about 300 rare
or out of print items,
   and a Random Item catalogue)  Quite a lot of Hebrew/English/German stuff
for the serious book
   collector, or researcher.


Seth Press
        Seth Press (write or call for free catalog)
        P.O. Box 1370
        Bryn Mawr, PA  19010
        (215)642-8633
        **this one is out of business or moved ...help**


Shapolsky Publishers
        Shapolsky Publishers
        136 West 22nd St.
        New York, NY  10011
        (212) 633-2022
        (212) 633-2123 (FAX)

    They sell a most unusual book called "the Word",The Dictionary
    that reveals the Hebrew Source of English, by Isaac E. Mozeson.
    It might be helpful for learning Hebrew.  This is one book that
    really takes the idea of the monogeneis of languages (ie the story
    of Babel) seriously.  There is certainly much that is fun to learn
    in this book, and if you like Greek and Latin too, you will have a ball.
    There is some controversy over this book; and it is possible that
    its finding might be wrong or unprovable, but one utilitarian view is
    that even if the etymology is wrong it still might be helpful for
    remembering the words (or writing poetry :)
    Isaac Mozeson can be reached at 201-836-3410


Soncino Press
        Soncino Press
        5 Essex Street
        New York,  NY 10002
        **this address is out of date...i need the new one..HELP **

    Send for catalog.  Famous publishers of Bible,Zohar, Midrash Rabbah,
    Talmud, etc.  This is the new address, that I haven't been able to check:

        Soncino Press
        123 DitmasAve.
        Brooklyn, NY  11218
        (718) 972-6200
        (718) 972-6204 (FAX)


UAHC Press
        UAHC Press
        838 Fifth Ave,
        New York, NY  10021
        (212) 249-0100
        (212) 734-2857 (FAX)

    The have a large and very good catalog of books, educational materials
    and torah tapes (often geared as bar mitzvah teaching aids).  I think
    this catalog is a must: even though it is from a Reform place the
    Hebrew teaching materials (among other things) can be of great use
    for anyone.  This place publishes an  *extremely* good 3 volume
    elementary Hebrew reader of childrens stories.  They are excellent for
    self study by adults too.  This is the "Mah Tov" series by Abraham
    and Adaia Shumsky (only $6.00 per volume)  Each volume contains
    10 stories (about 100 pages/volume) that illustrate charity, or humbleness
    or some theme of that nature.  Each story has an english/hebrew
    glossary of vocabulary words for that story.
    There are workbooks and teachers guides
    available ($6/vol and $3.50/vol respectively).  Educational discounts
    available.


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: GENERAL BOOK STORES, MAIL-ORDER (helpful for finding books)

  (items in this section are general book sellers that often have
   interesting Judaica books, or academic and scholarly books)

You can anonymous ftp rtfm.mit.edu to get lists of mail-order books/catalog
/pub/usenet/news.answers/books/stores/ship-by-mail
/pub/usenet/news.answers/books/catalogues


Basic Books
        Basic Books
        (800) 331-3761


Blackwell's Rare Books
        Blackwell's Rare Books
        38 Holywell Street
        Oxford OX1 3SW
        England
        (0865) 792792
        FAX (0865) 248833

    A good generic mail order place in the UK.


Cody's
        Cody's
        2454 Telegraph
        510 Berkeley CA
        (510) 845-7852

    "One of the two stores in the Bay area I hold up as the definition of
    the term 'bookstore.' (The other is Kepler's in Menlo Park.)"  A very
    large selection of just about everything (foreign-language books on
    Dwight just west of Telegraph).  "Cody's is the only book store in the
    Bay Area with a significant selection of books on various subjects that
    interest me (including Judaica, system dynamics and whitewater maps).
    It is true that it isn't as good as it was when Fred Cody was alive
    ... but it's still a damn good store." There is even a book about
    Cody's: CODY'S BOOKS: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF A BERKELEY BOOKSTORE,
    1956-1977, by Pat and Fred Cody (it was described in an article in the
    August 3, 1992 issue of "Publishers Weekly").  Will ship worldwide.
    Sun-Thu 9:15AM-9:45PM, Fri-Sat 9:15AM-10:45PM.  GMT-8h


Dover Publications, Inc.
        Dover Publications, Inc. [US]
        31 East 2nd Street
        Mineola, NY 11501

    Write for catalogue: Dover Complete Catalog of Fiction, Literature And
    Language Learning.  Mostly paperbacks.  Very low prices.  Some of the
    books are cheaply constructed.  Nice selection, lots of reprints of
    books.  No phone numbers, no credit cards.  Money-back guarantee.
    Optional mailing (UPS, US post, foreign orders).  Two Dover Bookstores:
    180 Varick St., 9th floor, New York, NY 10014 (9am-4:30pm M-F) and 11
    East Second St., Mineola, NY 11501 (9am-3pm M-F).
    They publish an inexpensive translation of Maimonides Guide for the
    Perplexed, among other interesting items.


Eisenbrauns/Scholar's Source
        Scholar's Source/Eisenbrauns
        P.O. Box 275
        Winona Lake, IN 46590-0275
        (219) 269-2011

    Eisenbraun's publishes secular academic books on the ancient Near East,
    including Biblical Israel.  They also sell similar books from other
    publishers under the name Scholars Source, including some second hand
    items, which go fast.  Most of their books from other publishers are
    sold at a 10 to 20 percent discount.  The book "Biblical Hebrew Syntax"
    is an interesting book, by Waltke and O'Connor.


Ideal Book Store
        Ideal Book Store
        1125 Amsterdam at 115th
        New York NY
        (212) 662-1909

    Almost exclusively a humanities and social sciences bookstore.  "Ideal
    has the best philosophy collection in New York, and that includes the
    Strand.  They also have a very extensive collection of Judaica.  The
    books are used but the proprietor is a stickler for only shelving books
    in the best possible condition.  I recently went looking for a biography
    of and primary works by Simone Weil and Ideal had everything I needed
    where most places--again, including the Strand, which I love--had very
    little."


James Press
        James Press
        (800) 247-6553


Powell's City of Books
        Powell's City of Books
        1005 W. Burnside
        Portland,
        (503) 228-4651
        (503) 228-4631 (FAX)
        (800) 878-7323
        (800) 225-6911
        ping@technical.powells.portland.or.us  (for technical book database)

    Give them a call and they will search for *any* book.  they have
    new and used books by the millions; with depth and coverage greater
    than most large-city libraries.  ships world-wide.


The Scholars Bookshelf
        The Scholars Bookshelf
        110 Melrich Rd.
        Cranbury, NJ 08512

    They put out many catalogs each year with a lot of closeouts in many
    different areas.  History, philospophy, literature, Judaica..  The
    catalog I got yesterday includes Miamonides: Guide to the Purplexed,
    39.95, pictorial history of the Holocaust, and Steinsaltz's Talmud.
    They do not indicate a telephone number, but will respond to mail
    inquiries.


Scholars Press
        Scolars Press Customer Services
        P.O. Box 6996
        Alpharetta, GA  30239-6996
        (800) 437-6692
        (404) 475-9245
        (404) 442-5114

    Call for catalog.  They are one important source for academically
    and research oriented materials.  They do have a substantial
    discount for members... and recognize membership in a number of
    other organizations.  They are also on WWW server at:

        http://scholar.cc.emory.edu

    address questions to jadair@unix.cc.emory.edu  who is James R. Adair,
    managing editor for the TELA site.  there are on-line catalogs, info
    on meetings, grants, employment opportunities etc.  THey are concentrating
    on academic and sholarly resources in biblical literature, religion,
    philology, philosophy, classics, archeology, history...  check it out!


Seminary Cooperative Bookstore
        Seminary Cooperative Bookstore
        Chicago Theological Seminary
        58th Street and University Avenue
        (800) 777-1456

    "Has a good theological section but its only connection with the
    Seminary is that it rents space from them. It is, in my opinion, the
    best academic bookstore in the social sciences and humanities in the
    world, for English-language books at any rate.  Anyone can shop there,
    but members receive a 10% discount on most books and may special-order
    books from anywhere in the world.  Membership costs $30 (for three
    shares of stock)."  (Ask them for further details.)  They will ship
    worldwide.  "Books arrive well-packaged and I've never gotten a damaged
    one."


Strand Book Store
        Strand Book Store
        828 Broadway (at 12 th St.)
        New York City, NY  10003-4805
        (212) 473-1452
        (212) 473-2591 (FAX)
        (800) 366-3664 Catalog/Credit Card orders only ($20 mininum)
		EMAIL: strand@strandbooks.com

    They put out a catalog of general interest, and will also do book searches.
    The catalog is an absolute must as it contains many Judaica items.
    They have Steinsaltz Talmud at $34/volume and Klein's Eytmological
    Dictionary for $15 plus many other great items. Specifically, Klein's
    can be obtained from catalog H-9.


WordsWorth Books
        WordsWorth Books
        30 Brattle Street
        Cambridge MA  02138-3761
        (800) 899-2202 or (617) 354-5201
        FAX (617) 354-4674
        info@wordsworth.com
		CompuServe: 73457,315
		http://www.wordsworth.com
		gopher://gopher.wordsworth.com

    The flag-ship of Harvard Square book shops with 100,000+ titles.  Has
    been offering their book store service through e-mail for quite a while.
    "Their staff have managed to locate and send many books for me (in
    Sweden) via UPS Express at costs equal or less than buying at a real
    store (hardcovers especially).  What's more, the book search costs only
    one dollar.  Their collection is really huge, too."  Mon-Sat
    8:30AM-11:30PM, Sun 10AM-10:30PM).  GMT-5h


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: HEBREW SOFTWARE  Hebrew Wordprocessors, Hebrew Literature on disk


Accent Software International/Kivun
        Accent Software International/Kivun
        P.O. Box 53063
        Jerusalem ISRAEL
        Tel: +972-2-793723
        Fax: +972-2-793731
        questions may be addressed to: info@accent.co.il

    This company produces the multilingual Windows word processor, Dagesh,
    which is distributed by Davka, among other companies.
    It has been on the market for almost two years
    and supports typing in virtually all
    Western languages (e.g. English, French, Spanish, Finnish,
    etc.), as well as Hebrew and Russian.
    There is a complete Hebrew and English Spell checker,
    including options for checking Hebrew according to either
    "regular" or academic usage.  It includes 20+
    fonts in Hebrew (as well as the fonts needed for Russian
    support).  The spell checker does not check nikud, however
    There is also a less expensive version Dagesh Lite.
    Current version is 1.1 and includes a free upgrade to 2.0,
    scheduled to ship later this year. (Note: Lite does not include
    a free upgrade)
    Accent Software International also produces a line of general multilingual
    word processors under the name Accent.


Ben-Gold Associates, Inc.
        Ben-Gold Associates, Inc.
        P.O. Box 3608
        Cherry Hill, NJ  08034
        (800) 783-7417
        (609) 779-7841
        (609) 424-0509 (FAX)

    They sell "Milonit", the electronic hebrew-english dictionary.
    This small computer has an elevated querty keyboard, along with
    an Israeli keyboard and 65,000 entries (250,000 words).  It displays
    Hebrew words in English transliteration and Hebrew characters.  cost $139.


Davka Co.
        Davka Co.
        7074 N. Western Ave.
        Chicago, IL  60645
        (800) 621-8227
        (312) 465-4070 (Illinois, or Canada)
        (312) 262-9298 (FAX)
		http://www.davka.com

    They have CD roms of extensive Hebrew literature (Talmud etc.)  besides
    word processors etc.  Now, if they would only issue the stuff with nikud
    in it, even i would get it (expecially a computer Talmud with nikud
    would be great)  Well, now that they have updated things they have much
    of the Soncino Hebrew/English tanach, talmud, midrash on CD rom.  They have
    tanach, sidurim, machzorim with Hebrew and nikud.  A lot of good stuff!


Gamma Productions, Inc.
        Gamma Productions, Inc.
        710 Wilshire Bvd, Suite 609
        Santa Monica, CA  90401  USA

        Gamma Prod.
        2130 Sawtelle Blvd. Suite 305
        Los Angeles, CA 90025
        310-478-6774

    I just received an announcement from Gamma Productions of
    UniType that extends Windows to accept 175 languages. Will
    work in any Windows application, according to the flyer.
    "Right-to-left languages require text to be intered one line at
    a time with carriage returns."
    List $299 (special until May 1 for Gamma customers $149)


The Hebrew Users' Group Newletter
        The Hebrew Users' Group Newletter
        c/o Berkely Hillel Foundation
        2736 Bancoft Way
        Berkely, CA  94704
        (415) 845-7793

    I am not sure if this is still an active organization. let me know.


Judaic Clip Art (free catalogue)
        Heritage Graphics
        PO Box 139R
        Blauvelt, NY  10913
        (914) 359-0761


Kabbalah Software
        Kabbalah Software
        8 Price Drive
        Edison, NJ 08817
        kabbalah@shamash.org
        980-572-0869


Lautman & Associates
        Lautman & Associates (Hebrew Software)
        P.O. Box 5405
        Herzliya 46153,  Israel
        +972-9-585075
        FAX: +972-9-576017


Lev Software
        Lev Software
        P.O. Box 17832
        Plantation, FL 33318
        (800) 776-6538

    Hebrew/Russian/English word processors.  Call or write for catalog.


Linguist's Software, Inc.
        Linguist's Software, Inc.
        PO Box 580
        Edmonds, WA 98020
        (206) 775-1130
        (800) 729-9500

    The only full, complete, accurate, and authorized source that I know if is
    sold by Linguist's Software for $99, I believe. What I have is on three
    floppies, in MS Word format, for the MAC and requires a Hebrew font. I have
    used it and my professors here are impressed. I am, too. It says on the
    disk, copyright by Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft 1967/77/83 and 1987 by P.B.
    Payne. They are the ones who produce the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia,
    the standard among Western theological scholarship. I'm sure that they have
    a Windows version as well. Hope this helps.
    (zxmli05@student.uni-tuebingen.de (Shaughn Daniel)

    A recent phone call to them has revealed that you must also purchase
    a BHS font that has the cantillation marks.  The upshot of this is that
    their software isn't compatible with the Macintosh HebrewScript
    system extensions.  I would strongly urge the company to make their
    software compatible with the "upper ascii" Israeli-Hebrew fonts.


Nisus can be bought direct (and at student discount) nisus@weber.ucsd.edu
        Nisus Software  (formerly Paragon Concepts, Inc.)
        107 S. Cedros Ave.
        Solana Beach, CA  92075-1900
        (800) 922-2993 (extension #1 for technical support)
        (619) 481-1477
        (619) 481-6154 (FAX)
        AppleLink: NISUS.MGMT

    Macintosh word processor that supports mixed directional text including
    Arabic, Czech, English, Hebrew, Hungarian, Persian (Farsi), Polish and
    Cyrillic Languages.  You can also type in Chinese, Korean, and Thai, if
    you have the appropriate Language Extensions (script, keyboard layout file,
    fonts,etc.).

    Call Apple's Customer Assistance (WorldScript info) (800) 776-2333

    Nisus suggests calling MacConnection for discount
        MacConnection
        (800) 800-0002
        (603) 446-7711
        (603) 446-7791 (FAX)


Torah Educational Software
        Torah Educational Software
        21 Main Street
        Monsey, NY  10952
        (800) 952-6853
        (914) 356-1343
        (914) 356-1485 (FAX)
        infor@torahscholar.com
		http://www.torahscholar.com/

    Sells the 'Bible Scholar' for mac or ibm for $239, fonts, plus much
    more.  Hebrew Writer-tm 2.5 (made in Israel) has auto-nikud, $189
    for IBM.  (according to the sales representative this program
    will automatically put in the nikud from a database supplied with
    the program.  if it works properly, it sounds like a dream come true :)
    [also two locations in Israel]


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: VIDEOS, TAPES, MUSIC etc.


Barron's Educational Series, Inc.
        Barron's Educational Series, Inc.
        250 Wireless Blvd.
        Hauppauge, New York  11788
        (800) 645-3476 (to order: ext: 204, 214, 215)
        (516) 434-3723 (FAX)

        Georgetown Book Warehouse,
        34 Armstrong Ave.
        Georgetown, Ont.  L7G 4R9
        (800) 247-7160  (for Canada)
        (905) 877-5575 (FAX)

    They sell the Foreign Service Insitute Lanuage Series.
    about $80 for the  12 cassette Hebrew Set,
    or $15 for just instruction book
    or $18 for a smaller 2 cassette set.
    They also sell "201 Hebrew Verbs Fully Conjugated in All tenses"
    by Abraham S. Halkin (an *excellent* book) for $12.
    20% discount for educators, and free shipping for prepaid orders
    over $25.


Books on Tape
        Books on Tape.
        Box 7900 MM
        Newport Beach, CA 92658
        (800) 626-3333

    Nearly 3000 best sellers to choose from.  THe books are *unabridged*, up
    to 15 cassettes which you rent for 1 month.
    This is a general interest selection, not strictly Judaica. Free Brochure.


Chadish Media
        Chadish Media
        453 East 9 Street
        Brooklyn, NY 11218
        (718) 8563882

    They sell books and tapes to teach you how to daven, conduct service,
    trup/cantillation, etc.  I haven't determined yet wether they use
    Sephard or Ashkenaz prounciations


The Commuter's Chavrusah
        The Commuter's Chavrusah
        Rabbi Yissocher Frand
        Maggid Shiur, Ner Israel Yeshiva.

        Yad Yechiel Institute
        P.O. Box 511
        Owings Mills, MD 21117-0511


The Destiny Foundation
		The Destiny Foundation
		Shaar Communications
		127 Route 59
		Monsey, NY  10952
		(800) 499-9356
		(914) 356-7448
		(914) 356-7733 (FAX)
		desti02@ibm.net

	They sell tons of truly sensational lectures by Rabbi Berel Wein.
	Call for their catalog and check it out.  You really don't want
	to miss this.  He has also written a couple of high school level
	textbooks on Jewish history.  The books are interesting, and I suppose
	you can't expect much for "high school" but his real forte are
	his taped lectures.


Ergo Media
        Ergo Media
        688 American Legion Drive
        P.O. Box 2037
        Teaneck, NJ 07666-1437
        (800) 695-3746
        (201) 692-0663  (FAX)

    Jewish videotapes in English,and Hebrew and Yiddush (with English
    subtitles) Big selection, but only a small portion of it is religiously
    oriented.  They also have videos of Modern Israeli popular movies,
    perhaps some documentaries too.


Jewish Heritage Foundation
		Jewish Heritage Foundation
		15220 Lincoln Bldv.
		Oak Park, MI 48237
		(800) 797-7729

	Excellent tapes sets, at adult level, in many aspects of Jewish,
Biblical
	Talmudic history.  Scholarly, with printed materials from sources
in Hebrew and
	Aramaic. Prepared by R. Shmuel Irons, dean of the Detroit Kollel.
Emphasizes
	historical developement, but many issues on philosophy and halachah.
	The lectures are easily considered at the university level.  And anyone
	who gets into the hebrew language sources provided is definitely at
a much
	higher level of sophistication than your average university level
course
	on this material.


Kol-Ami
        Sisu Home Entertainment, Inc,
        20 West 38th Street, 2nd Floor
        New York, NY  10018

    I just got a catalog from Sisu Home Entertainment, Inc.,
    Their mail order division  Nefesh Ami is now called Kol-Ami
    The content of the catalog appears unchanged.  Books, sheet music,
    song books, CDs, cassettes and videos.
    The new phone and address is:

        Kol-Ami
        P.O.Box 381
        Hicksville, NY 11802-0381
        800-393-4AMI (4264)
        516-933-2196, 212-768-8889
        212-768-7413 (FAX)

    Recently, I saw another adress for them (in the Jerusalem Post)

        Kol-Ami, Inc.
        18 W. 27th St. 10th floor
        New York, NY  10001
        (800) 393-4264
        212-779-7944
        212-779-7115 (this might be a FAX #)

    Among other items they are selling they now have Hebrew language
    instructional videos; introduce 1,000 vocab words, presumably
    equivalent to a year of Ulpan.


Mostly Music
		Mostly Music
		4805 13th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 438-7322
		(718) 438-3845
		(800) 5-MOSTLY

	THis is an excellent store in the heart of Borough Park, Brooklyn.
They have an
	extensive collection and also put out a large 32 page mail order
catalog.  Lots of
	stuff by Sholomo Calebach, Tapes of chassidic niggunim for only $4,
CD's, catorial,
	childrens', israeli and yiddish music, etc.


M & M Enterprises
        M & M Enterprises
        P.O. Box 1103
        Forest Hills, NY 11375
        (718) 263-0604
        FAX (718) 520-0280 (send for brochure)


Shalheves, Inc.
		Shalheves, Inc.
		PO Box 361
		Monsey, NY  10952
		(800) 998-0400 (orders)
		(914) 356-3515 (non-orders)
		(914) 425-2094 (FAX)

    They sell a 12 hour tape set for $37.95 by Rabbi Ezriel Tauber on how to
    rejuvenate your marriage.  Other items available too.  Call for catalog
    with thousands of tapes, book, videos in English, Hebrew, Yiddish, Spanish
    French, Portugeuse. Membership subscriptions and priveleges available. Free
    shipping and handling, major credit cards accepted.  Also sponsors
"heimishe"
    weekends of inspiring Torah lectures in first-class resorts.


Sichos in English
        Sichos in English
        788 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        (718) 778-5436
		(718) 735-4139
		sie@chl.chabad.org

	They have a great bunch of tape series by Rabbi Shloma Majeski
	on Chabad Chassidic Philosphy (7 sets), a Holiday Series (4 sets)
	Chabad Hertiage series (historical, 4 sets), Yechidus (1 set).
	Each set contains 4 Tapes (8 Lessons) and costs $20 plus postage.


SyberVision Systems, Inc.
        SyperVision Systems, Inc.
        One Sansome Street, Suite 810
        San Franscisco, CA 94104
        (800) 888-9885

    They sell language tapes; a 16 tape set (about 30 half hour lessons)
    will teach you 500 words and phrases most often used in the daily lives
    of native foreign speakers using the "Pimsleur Technique" and
    "Graduated Interval Recall"  In addition to Hebrew, they have French I &
    II, Spanish I & II, German I & II, Italian, Portugeuse (Brazilian),
    Japanese, Russian I, Chinese (Mandarin), Arabic, Modern Greek, and
    English as a second language for Spanish speakers.  The brochure has no
    price, but on the phone they said it was about $300/set., and 30 day
    money back if not satified.


Tara Publications
        Tara Publications
        29 Derby Ave.
        Cedarhurst, NY 11516
        (516) 295-2290
        FAX: (516) 295-2291 (large mail-order business too)

    Jewish music books. Presumably this is the largest publisher


Torah Communications Network
        Torah Communications Network
        Box 504 Wickliffe
        Wickliffe, Ohio 44092
        (216) 585-0505
        (216) 944-6217 (FAX)

    100's of Torah lectures on cassette tape at $6.00/tape, or $5.00/tape
    if more than 5 tapes are purchased.  Lectures on Nach, Talmud, topical
    talks on Tzedakah, Halchic issues related to modern careers, plus
    much more.  A few tapes are in Hebrew and also Yiddish.
    Send for catalogue.


Twerski Tapes
        Congregation Beth Jehudah
        2700 North 54th Street
        Milwaukee, WI  53210
        Twerski Tapes (800) 878-5000

    Tapes from several Twerskis, including Rebbitzen Twerski.  Lots of good
    lectures available.  Many sale items and discounts available.


Ultimate Issues
	Ultimate Issues
	10573 W. Pico Blvd.
	Los Angeles, CA  90064-2300
	(310) 558-3958
	(310) 558-4241  (FAX)
	(800) 225-8584

    Dennis Prager puts out a quartly called "Ultimate Issues"  This place
    also sells a Russian as well as English version of "the nine questions
    people ask about judaism" which is a very informative book, and perhaps
    the best book that shows that you can follow Judaism and still be an
    intelligent rational person too.  The Russian addition is a sorely needed
    outreach tool.  However, the main thing sold here are tapes, video, and
    more tapes.  Prager certainly has been busy as a beaver, with all sorts
    of lectures, courses, radio talk shows, tv talk shows, and other
    articles.

Visual Educational Association
        Visual Educational Association
        581 Leffel Lane
        PO Box 1666
        Springfield, Ohio  45501
        (800) 243-7070
        (513) 324-5503
        (513) 324-5697 (FAX)

    They make flashcards (of Biblical Hebrew as well as many other
    languages) and other educational materials too.
    The catalog order form lists modern Hebrew as well.


Other:
    Polish/Jewish/Holocaust Video: 'The Last Chapter' not available for rent
    or in stores. (800) 423-6527 x12

    Master Daf, Each $3.00 tape consists of approximately 5 blatt. (800)
    213-6626, in Israel 03-579-4067

Tape of Yiddish & Ladino Folksongs ($11)
        Noah's Dove
        PO Box 1028R
        Trinidad, CA  95570


------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: RELIGIOUS ARTICLES, tallit, kipot, challah covers, gifts, art etc.

A.O.S. Inc Imports/Zerach Greenfield
		A.O.S/Greenfield
		140-35 69th Avenue
		POB 670263
		Flushing, NY  11367
		(718) 263-6445
		(800) 263-6445
		(718) 263-6447
		74640,2111@compuserve.com

    Israeli Judaica imports, presumably at wholesale prices.  Quantity ordering
    and special orders available, etrogim, tefillin, torah, aleph-bet beads,
    and just about everything else one could think of.  for example, tefillin
    are $155 in orders of 16/year.  I haven't recieved word on how reliable the
    kashrut of the tefillin are, however; but does sound like a sensational
price.


Any Wear You're Frum
		Any Wear You're Frum
		P.O. Box 9149
		Calabasas, CA  91372-9149
		(888) 4-MODESTY  (toll free)
		(888) 466-3378   (toll free)
		(818) 222-6887   FAX

    This is a Halachically Correct (HC) clothing catalog for women replete
with dresses (slightly below
    the elbow, and just above the ankle), hats, comfortable looking shoes,
along with quotes from Mishle
    (Psalms).  The strong point of this catalog is hats.  Some of the
dresses appears to be designed
    to be equally suitable for maternity and non-maternity use.


Best
		Best
		Religious Articles & Embroidery
		4021 14th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11218

	Really fancy looking items suitable for synagogue use: Amud & Bima
Covers, Poroches, Mantels, Chupas
	Mischsos (coffin covers), Plaques, also sort of Judaica Silver
items for Synagogue and institutional
	use, Challah covers (their brochure suggests that the synagogue
name can be embroidered on the
	challah covers and then these be used as a nice way to show
gratitude to a group of philanthropists
	that just pledged a big donation :)  Various custom work available.


Brica Sargous Jacobs
        Brica Sargous Jacobs
        2424 Brambleton Rd.
        Baltimore, MD  21209
        (401) 664-5658

     Custom tallit, etc.


California Stitchery
        California Stitchery
        6015 Sunnyslope Ave.
        Van Nuys, CA 91401-3020
        (800) 345-3332
        (800) 781-2120  FAX

    Judy Rosenbaum has a large collection of jewish needlework including
    challah cover (kits), cross-stitch and needlepoint pictures, keppot,
    tallis bags (tallit too).  I haven't found any other source for
    jewish needlework (all kits, these are not premade).


Contemporary Synagogue Art
        Presentations Gallery
        200 Lexington Ave.
        New York, NY  10016
        212-481-8181
        212-779-9015 (FAX)

        Ascalon Studios
        115 Atlantic Ave.
        Berlin, NJ.  08009
        (609) 768-3779

        Jaffa Collections
        (800) 274-0086 (East Coast)
        (800) 473-5232 (West Coast)



Copa Judaica
		Copa Judaica
		13065 SW 133 Ct.
		Miami, Fl  33186
		(800) 727-2672 (COPA)
		(305) 251-5859
		(305) 235-6070 (FAX)
		copajudaic@aol.com

    Very artistic Shabbat Candelabra, Menorah, Sedar Plates, Mezuzah Cases,
Jewelry,
    Wooden Judaic Dominoes (unique item), Modernistic Yads (unique), etc.


Corporate Expressions
        Corporate Expressions
        421-13 Route 59
        Monsey, NY 10952
        (800) 336-2291

    Bentchers, Yarmulka's Ketubahs, etc.  Complete catalog Quantity
    discounts for weddings, 16 different kinds of really nice bentchers, 10
    different kinds of kipot (in leather).


Crown Wholesalers Inc.
		Crown Wholesalers Inc.
		5424 11th AVE (side entrance)
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 871-6416
		(718) 851-3492  (FAX)
		(800) 636-0417  (outside of N.Y.S.)

    They sell Atarah and Yarmulkahs, A. Morgenstern, President.  Give them
a shot and get
    the color brochure, the Atarahs look pretty good.  Also, the prices on
the Yarmulkahs
    do look like they might actually be wholesale for real!


Eichler's
		Eichler's
		5004 - 13th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 633-1505
		(718) 633-1506 (FAX)
		(800) EICHLER  (outside of N.Y.S)

    Very complete selection of religious articles, gifts and books.  They stock
    some very hard to find Judaica books.  Open sunday, and worldwide shipping
    within 24 hours.  Seforim, Taleisim, custom Kesubos, Tefillin, CD's you
    name it!  For wholesale call 718-633-2933.  Located in the heart of
    Borough Park.


Galerie Robin
        Galerie Robin
        P O Box 50536
        Nashville, TN 37205
        (800) 635-8279

    Galerie Robin puts out a catalog specializing in Jewish art; and
    artistic religious objects and jewelry.  Some of the chanakah menorah
    are not kosher (because the candles are at different heights) and the
    mezusot come with 'paper scrolls' (they should be parchment).  THe cases
    are neat and you could get your own parchment from a real scribe for
    about $25+.  They show the scrolls put in rolled inside out so you can
    see the writing (and with mirrors so you can see the 'paper' all the way
    around)...i am still wondering if that is kosher, even if the mezuzah
    was real parchment and hand written :)


Genny's Table
		Genny's Table
		711 Chuckanut Drive
		Bellingham, WA  98226
		(800) 903-0357
		(360) 733-2964 (fax)

    Beautiful and traditional tablecloths, challah covers, silk tallit,
matzah and afikomen
    covers, wall hangings.  Most of the stuff is all in Hebrew which i like
(who needs translations
    on challah covers :)


Greenfeld Bros
        Greenfeld Bros. Talitinia Distr.
        5205 13 th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11219
        (800) 336-1210 Out of N.Y.
        (718) 633-8103
        FAX: (718) 438-2846

    Talit, Kippot...big color catalog


Hamafitz
        Hamafitz
        361 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn, N.Y.  11213
        (800) 622-STAM
        (718) 774-0900
      	(718) 221-0642  FAX

    Another Place that sells religious articles, mainly.  They have a
    more limited selection of books.  Prices here on etrogim, kippot seem
    to be very good.  Very competive pricing for talitim, shofars, and
    peshutim tefillin.  Give them a call.  A really nice item is
    an all cotton-beged talit katan imported from Israel (top quality
    only $14)


Hamakor Judaica-The Source for Everything Jewish
        The Source for Everything Jewish
        P.O. Box 48836
        Niles, IL 60714-0836
        (800) 426-2567
        FAX (708) 966-4033

    Art, books, menorahs, shofars, Maccabee Bear T shirts, toys, and the
    like


Heritage
		Heritage
		4908- 13th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11219
		(718) 972-5252

	Gifts for all occassions, plus lots of Hebrew Seforim. Will ship, an
	800 number will be forthcoming. Located in Borough Park.


Holy Land Art
		HolyLandArt
		2480-4 Briarcliff Road #311
		Atlanta, Georgia  30329
		(404) 986-6030
		(800) 274-4ART
		(404) 986-8113  (FAX)
		74461.3371@compuserve.com
		http://www.worlplaza.com/aleph1/holyland/holyland.html

    Has a catalog of contemporary inspirational prints based on biblical
    images originally created in felt applique by Jerusalem-based artist
    Bracha Lavee.  Other Jewish objets d'art available.  credit card orders
also.


Jacquelyn International Fashion
        Jacquelyn International Fashion
        Dept. J-H
        15 W. 37th Street
        New York, NY  10018
        (800) 272-2424
        (212) 302-2266

    Wigs.. etc. presumably good ones. Includes human hair wigs...looked
    pretty good, many are in the $300 price range.


Jewish Bride... & More!

		Jewish Bride... & More!
		P.O. Box #26341
		Tamarac, FL  33320
		(954) 721-5660
		(800) 864-1390
		http://www.gate.net/~jbride

	Incredible plates, kiddish cups, china, decanters, menorahs,
	havdalah sets and many other gift items; some are high quality
	with prices to match.  Talits, kippots, imprints etc.. check it out.


Judaica Art Kits
		Judaica Art Kits
		PO Box 10828
		Rochester, NY  14610
		(800) 862-3449


	Make your own family heirlooms...like Talit, etc.


Judaica Occassions
		Judaica Occassions
		55 Union Road, Suite 203
		Spring Valley, NY  10977
		(914) 352-9426
		(914) 356-8502 (FAX)
		(800) 336-2291

    Large 14 page catalog, mainly of gift items. Nice jewelry


Little Israel
        Little Israel
        392 Harvard St.
        Brookline, MA  02146
        (617) 734-4014
        (617) 566-9646 (FAX)

    Judaica Gifts, Music, including a small section of books (had a shelf
    of used Israeli books).  They sell a nifty watch that has Hebrew
    numberals on it (much nicer than Roman numerals :)  they will ship.


Kosher Klothes
		Kosher Kolthes
		P.O. Box 582
		Mercer Island, WA  98040
		(800) 399-4240

    A family business that makes table clothes, table runners, aprons,
    napkins and kipot from of designs of Jewish interest.  A 52x70" tablecloth
    is $20.00   I have no idea if that is even a good price.


Leiter's Sukkahs
		Leiter's Sukkas
		1346 39th Street
		Brooklyn, NY  11218
		(718) 436-0303
		(718) 436-0909
		(800) 422-9199
		(718) 871-7136  FAX

	Advertised as the largest manufacturer of sukkahs in the world, they
	offer many designs, including custom sizes.  Canvas, fiberglass,
modular wood, etc.
	Also bamboo poles, bamboo or mehadrin mats.  Bear in mind that mats
must come
	with some kind of kosher certification (as the mats had to be made
expressly for schach)


Mah Jongh Company
        MasFJocAh Company (free catalog)
        (800) 821-3029


Mazel Tov Exclusives
		Mazel Tov Exclusives
		2109 W. Parker Rd. Suite 204
		Plano, TX  75023
		(800) 977-7999
		214-758-4400
		214-379-3160

	Offers a 20 page full color catalog of many unique Yom Tov items like
	Placemats, Napkins, linen, table runners etc.  Also many T-shirts that
	one might find amusing.

Merkaz Stam
        Merkaz Stam
        309 Kingston Avenue
        Brooklyn04N.U  11213
        (800) 264-7705
        (718) 773-1120
        FAX: (718) 773-0090

    This store will do mail order; they have Tefillin, Tzitzis, Mezusos,
    books, and Religious articles.  THe prices seemed very good, and they
    are located right in Crown Heights with apparently a decent reputation
    around there.  I have seen their muzzahs and the workmanship looks good.
    They also provide free cases and handy instructions on hanging them.
Muzzas
    start at about $26 (quite good for kosher ones).     Rabbi Y. Mishulovin


Messing/Candle Lites
		Messing/Candle Lites
		6307 Pimlico Road
		Baltimore, MD  21209
		(410) 358-5713
		(410) 358-1708  (FAX)
		http://zeus.towson.edu/~ymessi1/

    Instead of messing with wax candles for shabbas and yom tov, this company
    sells 4 kinds of hand-blown pyrex bulbs that fit into your existing
    candlesticks.  THey use a permanent reusable wick.  Olive oil units
    available.  Also colored oil is available.


National Sukkah Outlet (formerly Northern Jersey Sukkah Outlet)
		National Sukkah Outlet
		283 High Street
		Passaic, NJ  07055
		(800) 778-5624
		(201) 778-5624
		(914) 578-5624

	They make Modular sukkahs from textured fiberglass, douglas fir, or
	canvas.  The canvas ones can be set up in less than 30 minutes with a
	single tool (provided).  Delivery, installation, and custom designed
	sukkas are available.



OSY, inc.
        O.S.Y., INC.
        4424 16th Avenue
        Brooklyn, NY  11204
        (718) 436-0222
        (800) 322-WIGS
        (718) 972-5998  (FAX)
        (800) 424-9447  (in Canada)
        03-5704-253  (in Israel)
        01-806-4852  (in London)

    Very very stylish collection of human hair and synthetic wigs
    that comes in a color catalog arranged as a nice Hebrew calendar.
    Prices are not included; try the 800 number.


Ruth Leah Designs
		Ruth Leah Designs
		Coral Springs, FL  33071-6824
		(800) 752-9323
		(305)753-7872 (fax)

	Custom design of prayer shawls for women, and now also for men.  I've
	seen the glossy photographs of the possible designs that are available
	and will just state flatly that they are incredibly beautiful.  Very
	impressive and one can get the full range of simple elegance to
very fancy
	and all sorts of personalized hebrew script and/or embroidery,
colors, etc.


S&S Worldwide
		S&S Worldwide
		PO Box 513
		Colchester, CT  06415-0513
		(800) 243-9232 (toll free calls)
		(860) 537-3451 (local)
		(800) 566-6678  (FAX)
		(860) 537-2866 (local FAX)
		service@snswwide.com
		http://www.snsside.com

	Judaic crafts, many oriented for children.  good for hebrew day
schools and the like.



Sadigh Gallery Ancient Art
        Sadigh Gallery Ancient Art
        303 5th Avenue Suite 1603
        New York, NY 10016
        (800) 426-2007
        (212) 725-7537
        FAX: 212-545-7612

    Sell [authentic] ancient artifacts.  They send regular catalogs and
    take bids on items by mail or phone.


Suggestions
        Suggestions
        P.O. Box 4109
        Highland Park, NJ 0890
        (800) 447-4440

    Hard to find gifts of a general nature.


Sukkah Center, the
		The Sukkah Center
		3720 14th Avenue
		Brooklyn, NY  11218
		(718) 436-6333
		(800) 227-SUKA

	All kinds of prefab sukka's.  Also bamboo matts that can be used
	as schach that are certified by O-K (Organized Kosher Laboratories).
	Keep in mind that a bamboo mat must have a hechsher as only a mat that
	was constructed with the intent (plus some other detailed
halacha's) can
	be used as schach.  THey have canvas and fiberglass sukkot.  Also the
	canvases are beautifully silkscreened.


The Toycrafter
		The Toycrafter
		1237 East Main St.
		Rochester, NY  14609
		(800) 433-8697
		(800) 654-7820  FAX
		http://world-web.com/toycrafter
		spintop@vivanet.com

	All sorts of fancy dreidles (mainly wooden) and a few other items.


W & E Baum Bronze Tablet Corp.
		W & E Baum Bronze Tablet Corp.
		200 60th Street
		Brooklyn , NY  11220-3712
		(718) 439-3311
		(718) 439-6556 (FAX)
		(800) 922-7377 (outside of N.Y.S)

	All sorts of English, and Hebrew memorial plaques, nameplates, etc.
	Yahrzeit Tablets, Donor Walls, Bulletin Boards, Awards, etc.


Weave Alot Studio
        Weave Alot Studio
        RR1 Box 1158
        Troy, ME  04987
        (207) 984-2130

    Handwoven Tallits, Yarmulkes, etc. $2.00 for brochure.


Ziontalis
        Ziontalis
        48 Eldridge St.
        New York, NY 10002
        (212) 925-8558   (call or write for catalog)

    As expected, they sells religious articles and lots of different tallit
    (but I haven't gotten word on the quality of their products yet) They
    sell 'Kosher' mezuzah parchment for $15.00 which seems so cheap I
    question whether it is can really be Kosher or not.


Zust
		Lauren J. Zust
		1753 Alma Street
		Palo Alto, CA  94306
		(415) 326-9725
		ESTHER44@aol.com

    Custom linoleum carving of Hebrew letters by a real sculptor, with a
    MFA from U. Penn! The linoleum blocks are used to make handrubbed in
    prints.  I've seen the photos: some pretty neat stuff.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: SERVICES, INFORMATION, NEWSPAPERS

first some miscelaneous phone numbers
You can call 1-(800) SAB-BATH to get candlelighting times based on date and
zipcode.  It's all automated.  Use a touchtone phone.  (this one seems to be
disconnected... but there is another number:

You can ask Shabbat shailos (ie. questions)
and get Shabbat hospitality by calling 1-(800) SHA-BBAT.

Try: 1-(800) 4-MOSHIACH to see what happens (ala Chabad :) also, 1-(800)
BE-GOOD-1

*****

Academy of Hebrew Language
        Academy of Hebrew Language
        p.o.b 3449
        Jerusalem 91034
        Israel
        972-2-632-242
        972-2-632-243
    This institution is part of Hebrew Unviversity in Jerusalem,
    Givat Ram


Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith
        Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith
        309 W. Washington
        Chicago, IL 60606


The Archive of Australian Judaica.....
    The Archive provides assistance to researchers from Sydney,
    interstate and overseas - theses writers, authors, film makers etc.
    If you would like any further information please contact: Marianne
    Dacy by phone:  02 692 4162     fax: 02  692 2890   or
      email:   dacy@tmx.mhs.oz.au


Chicago Community Kollel
		Chicago Community Kollel
		6506 North California
		Chicago, IL  60645
		(312) 262-9400
		(312) 262-7866
		cckollel@aol.com
		http://www.shalomnet.com/org/cjep

	They publish a terrific booklet called "Right or Left" by Rabbi
	Dovid Wolpin on "Laws and customs relating to the hand one should
	use when preforming Mitzvos"  It includes a special succos section.
	One should be aware that a left hander does not simply reverse their
	hand in all cases.  Sometimes yes, and sometimes no... therefore this
	booklet is an absolute must!

Hebrew Publications for Children, Inc.
        Hebrew Publications for Children, Inc.
        110 E. 59th St.  Suite 4100
        New York, NY  10022-1373
        (212) 339-6018

    "Olam Hadash" is the "Illustrated Hebrew Magazine for Children & Youth"
    Annual subscription rate is $12.00 (School Bulk rate available) for
    magazine published monthy from Sept.-May,
    by Hebrew Publications for Children, Inc. in cooperation with the
    Department of Education and Culture of the World Zionist Organization
    and the Jewish National Fund of America.  You can also write to
    the publications department/Jewish Agency at the same address to
    subscribe to "Lamatchil": a vowelled Hebrew bi-weekly newspaper
    published October through June at $12.00/year.


Hillel, 1640 Rhode Island Avenue, NW.  Washington DC, 20036


Histadruth Ivrith of America
        Histadruth Ivrith of America
        Hebrew Language and Culture Association
        47 West 34th Street, Room 609
        New York, NY  10001
        (212) 629-9443
        (212) 629-9472  (FAX)

    This is a really good place to write to.  Among other things
    they publish "Lamishpaha" an illustrated monthly in simple Hebrew
    with a dictionary on each page. $15/year.  They publish "Hadoar",
    a bi-weekly in Hebrew, and "Tov Lichtov" an international literary
    program that encourages creative writing in Hebrew along with
    various Ulpanim and trips.


Jewish Braille Institute
        Jewish Braille Institute
        110 East 30th Street
        New York, NY  10016

    The Jewish Braille Institute has books in Braille, in large type, and
    on cassette. JBI has the Five Books of Moses in Hebrew,
    English, and Yiddish on cassette, and in H and E in large type and braille
    All of this material is available free-of-charge to those who have
    certification that they are blind, visually impaired or learning disabled
    There is even a Braille Jewish calendar, and a newsletter which
    includes articles from a diverse range of Jewish periodicals and other
    periodicals' material on Jewish topics.  They also need volunteers
    The JBI is non-sectarian, that is, it does not favor or discriminate
    against any stream in Jewish religious, cultural or spiritual life.
    They have a number of different kinds of Passover Haggadahs: plan ahead!
    The JBI also helps students by reproducing textbooks or other
    student books into Large Type, Braille or onto cassette.


Jewish Bulletin of Northern California
        Jewish Bulletin of Northern California
        88 First St. Suite 300
        San Francisco  CA  94105-2522
        (415) 957-9340
        (415) 957-0266  (FAX)

    Jewish newspaper, of general interest, social, or political articles.
    If you subscribe you get the 93 edition of "RESOURCE: A Guide
    to Jewish Life in the Bay Area"


Jewish Children's Adoption Network
		(303) 573-8113


The Jewish Development Company, 18331-C Irvine Blvd.; Tustin CA 192680
        (714) 730-1419


Jewish Deaf Community Center
		Jewish Deaf Community Center
		1717 Bagley Avenue
		Los Angelos, CA  90035-4109
		JDCCNEWS@aol.com
		(310) 836-2666 (TDD)
		(310) 202-0035 FAX

	They have a bi-monthly newsletter.

198X Jewish Directory and Almanac, write
        Pacific Press Inc.
        501 Fifth Avenue, Suite 2203
        New York, NY  10017
        212-687-0500

    There are some really great items in here!  (Apparently, this is no longer
    published. the last one I have seen is 1986...i wonder if there are any
more
    recent ones The above address is no longer valid)


The Jewish Heritage for the Blind
		The Jewish Heritage for the Blind
		1655 East 24th Street
		Brooklyn, NY  11229


Jewish National Fund (trees) 42 East 69th Street; NCY  10021. (212) 879-9300


Jewish Women's Resource Center, National Council of Jewish Women, New York
    Section, 9 East 69th Street, New York, NY 10021, (212) 535-5900: They
    maintain a library achive materials (for possible research) plus they sell
    a few books by mail, and provide some other local services.


Kashrus Magazine
		Kashrus Magazine
		P.O. Box 204
		Brooklyn NY  11204

    Every year, Kashrus magazine publishes an index
    to all the Kosher symbols and the people behind them.
    The latest index was published in Issue #71, dated
    Kislev 5755, November 1994. Request the "Kosher Supervision Guide"
    issue, number 71.
    The cost is $3.00 for one copy, $2.00 for two to ten copies, and
    $1.50 for 11 to 50 copies.  Better rates for more than 50 copies


National Congress of Jewish Deaf, and Jewish Deaf Congress, Inc.
		Judy Slomivic Gunter
		33 South Landing Road
		Rochester, NY  14610
		(716) 387-0762 TTY/Voice
		(716) 387-0763 FAX

    Quarterly (Newsletter), Youth retreat, and outreach, archives, dictionary
    of Judaic signs, shabbatons are a few of their activities.


National Jewish Outreach
	National Jewish Outreach
	485 Fifth Avenue, Suite 701
	New York, NY 10017
	(212) 986-7450
	(212) 986-7476  (FAX)
	(800) 44-HEBRE(W)
	(800) 44-TORAH
	(800) MMM-SHAB(BOS) for list of partcipating synagogues

    Off a free Hebrew Reading Crash course at 300 locations around
    the US. Also Crash Course in Basic Judaism, Level II Hebrew Reading
    Course and over 150 Beginners Services around the country.
    check it out!


Outreach Judaism
        Outreach Judaism
        PO Box 789
        Monsey, NY  10952
        (800)-315-5397

    Counter-missionary books, tapes.  Their materials are generally pretty
    informative, even for people who are not amateur counter-missionaries :)
    In particular, the set of tapes of lectures by Rabbi Tovia
    Singer are well worth the $59.  I have heard the lectures live as
    well as the tapes and printed material that accompanies the tapes and
    have found it very well researched.  He has collected information that
    is very hard to find anywhere else.  There are 15 tapes that cover
    how missionaries have manipulated the so-called Old Testament with
    mistranslations and misquotations fit their own agenda.  He discusses
    many topics from Sin & Atonement, to Isaiah 53, to other messianic
    passages clearly explaining what the Hebrew actually means and how
    these verses have been historically distorted.
    The following two locations might still be valid:
    National Computer BBS (313) 967-5397
    Jews for Judaism, Box 15059, Baltimore, MD 21208.  (410) 602-0276.
    gopher://shamash.org:70/11/judaica/answers/missionaries
    http://www.utexas.edu/students/cjso/untitled_folder/Truth_page.html

Prayer Hotline to Israel (800) 545-PRAY Rufuah/Yeshuah, 1469 42nd Street,
Brooklyn, NY 11219


Project Genesis
	Project Genesis
	P.O. Box 1230
	Spring Valley, NY  10977-8230
	(914) 356 - 3040
	(914) 356 - 6722  (FAX)
	Net: genesis@shamash.org

	http://shamash.org/genesis/

    They can provide speakers for contemporary Jewish social and political
    issues.  They also operate a number of mailing lists over internet.


Shaar Lematchil
	Shaar Lematchil
	P.O. Box 199
	Tel-Aviv 61001
	Israel

    If you are interested in receiving Sha'ar Lematchil, which is an Israeli
    newspaper written in easy Hebrew: The subscription rate in the U.S. is
    $115 (USD) per year. You can send them a check directly with your name
    and address printed


Shalom Home (800) 8-SHALOM  (help relocating, finding kosher food, schools..)


Simon Wiesenthal Center
        Simon Wiesenthal Center
        9760 West Pico Blvd.
        Los Angeles, CA  90035.

    The Simon Wiesenthal Center is on the lookout for hate propaganda
    including revisionists on the Internet & BBS'es.  If you come
    across any, please let them know immediately.  They can be
    contacted at:

        R.EATON3@GENIE.GEIS.COM


Temple Beth Solomon of the Deaf
        Temple Beth Solomon of the Deaf
        13580 Osborne St.
        Arleta, CA 91331
        (818) 896-6721 TDD
        (818)899-2202  Voice & FAX

    They can send further info to you about finger spelling the Hebrew aleph
    -bet, and a list of Jewish signs used at Temple Beth Solomon, and further
    info.

------------------------------------------------------------
Subject: FOOD (hopefully Kosher!)


2nd Ave Deli fed-ex's kosher food, including chicken soup.

        (800)  NYC-DELI    (800) 692-3354)

    [I have reports that they stay open on Shabbat, and that some patrons will
    not use this place as a result.  Verify this before you order, if that is
    a concern.  Other reports are that the level
    of supervision in the 2nd Ave Deli is such that it is not generally
    accepted in Orthodox Circles]


Amara Kosher Meats
        Amara Kosher Meats
        89 Washington Place, Suite 200
        New York, NY  10011
        1-800-64AMARA (1-800-642-6727)
        FAX: (212) 388-9443
        (212) 388-9444 (inquires, etc.)

    Large selection of Glatt Kosher meats, poultry shipped anywhere.
    Everything is USDA inspected and Star K supervision of Rabbi
    Heinemann.  Custom orders can be arranged.  24 hour ordering
    (except holidays), items shipped frozen with reusable ice packs
    or dry ice, by UPS or Federal Express.  Shipping is $8.50 per address.
    Of note: Ground beef is $3.49/lb, CHuck Roat $5.59/lb, Turkey Breast
    $3.09, also duck, veal, lamb, deli items available in approximately
    1 to 10 lb lots.


Ben-Ezer (Citrus)
	Ben-Ezer
 	440 Park Avenue
	NYC, 10016
	(212) 532-7097

    Need more info on this one.


Empire Kosher Poultry, Inc.
        Empire Kosher Poultry, Inc.
        River Road
        PO Box 165
        Mifflintown, PA  17059-0165
        (717) 436-5921
        (800) 233-7177
        (717) 436-9269 (FAX)

    They sell frozen kosher poultry, and if you give them a call they
    will send you information describing their entire production process,
    noting that the chickens are fed all natural feeds (no hormones,
    anti-biotics or any non-natural feed additives) are free roaming,
    cold water processed (which is believed to cut down on the spead
    of bacterial infections) plus if you request they will send you a
    video tape showing their processing plant etc.  The kashruth is O-U.


Golden Hill
		Golden Hill, Kosher Gourmet Catalog
		140 West Fourth Street
		Williamsport, PA  17701-9924
		(888) 978-2000  Call Toll Free
		(888) 825-2810  Toll free FAX
		http://www.goldenhill.com

	A variety of hechshers and items, from spice blends to meats.


Hagafen Cellars
        Hagafen Cellars
        P.O. Box 3035
        Napa, CA  94558
        (707) 252-0781
        (800) 456-VINO

    Premium Napa Valley wines... Orthodox-Union supervision.  Perhaps
    someone can relay what sort of prices and bulk shipping arangements
    they will make.


Harvest Direct
		Harvest Direct
		P.O. Box 4514
		Decatur, IL  62525-4514
		(800) 835-2867

    Kosher food supplier.  give them a call and see what they have


Isragift (Delivery to Israel) (800) 685-9218  (201) 866-7667
    P.O.B. 654, Union City, NJ 07087  FAX: (201) 601-0842
    Brochure says they deliver goody packages of wine,ligquor,chocolate,
    coffee; prices from $30 to $140.  your relatives may prefer the cash ;-)


The Kosher Connection
        The Kosher Connection
        3195 SW Raleighview Drive
        Portland, OR  97225
        (800) 950-7227

    Gourmet kosher gift baskets delivered in U.S., Canada and Israel.
    Year-round and holiday gifts.  Featuring foods from the Pacific Northwest
    and Israel.  Kof-K supervised.  Free brochure.


Kosher Cornucopia, Ltd.
        Kosher Cornucopia, Ltd. in
        Jeffersonville, Long Island.
        (800) 756-7437

    ask for catalogues of mail-order food baskets.


Kosher Salmon, Cavier, etc. (800) 331-3001
    FAX (904) 222-6525   Scottish Crown, LTD.
    1704 Thomasvill Rd. Suite #115, Tallahassee, FL  32303


Meat Service c/o Mrs Irving Freistat (to Israel)
           1 North Dawes Avenue
           Kingston, PA  18704    717-288-4002


Mrs. Maltz's Knishes, Inc.
        Redwood City, CA 94063
        (800) 875-6474

    Send a dozen kinishes for $19.95, etc....


------------------------------------------------------------------
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES (for adults)

American Zionist Youth Foundation (AZYF)
	American Zionist Youth Foundation
	110 E. 59th St.
	New York, NY  10022
	(212) 339-6916
	(800) 27-ISRAEL
	(212) 755-4781  (FAX)

    Call or write for "the complete guide to the israel experience"
    which is a comprehensive listion of all education Israel programs
    available for Jewish youth between the ages of 12-35.  I cannot vouch
    on how comprehensive it really is, but you do get a nice 80-page book.


Board of Jewish Education
        Board of Jewish Education
        Special Needs Department
        11710 Hunter Lane
        Rockville, MD  20882

    They publish a chart of the Hebrew Alphabet in Sign, and other educational
    materials for special needs.


Drisha Institute
		Drisha Institute for Jewish Education
		131 West 86th Street, 9th Floor
		New York, NY  10024
		(212) 595-0307
		(212) 595-0679  FAX
		drisha@panix.com

	Advanced Jewish Studies for Women: Talmud, bible, Jewish law,
	philosophy, rabbinics; advanced and beginning.
	Full & Part time, Day & Evening classes.


Lubavitch
        Hadar Hatorah, Yeshiva for Men
        824 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn,  NY  11213
        718-735-0250
		hadarh@ix.netcom.com
		http://www.hadarhatorah.org

        Machon Chana, Jewish Women's College
        825 Eastern Parkway
        Brooklyn, NY  11213
        718-735-0217
		718-735-0030

    This is a Baal Tshuvah Yeshiva in Crown Heights Brooklyn
    operated by Chabad.  It has all levels for adults, from the *very*
    beginning to advanced; and is open to all men and women.  It is
    a very open place, one can visit anytime, start and stop anytime,
    flexible pay scale, and they seem to have no pressure there, either
    academic or emotional.  It seems to be one good place for someone
    who wants to learn something (or anything) Jewish...perhaps with
    an exploratory intent; and one need not worry that this place will be
    only for Chabadniks.  Also, during winter vacation (~dec22 - ~jan 2)
    and during spring vacation they have week long programs.


National Council of Young Israel
		National Council of Young Israel
		3 West 16th Street
		New York, NY  10011
		(212) 929-1525
		(800) 617-NCYI


	Give them a call and see what they have to offer.  One of the
nicest things
	they provide is a really nifty pocket (hebrew/english) calendar
with contributions
	of $5.00 or more.

Ohr Somayach
        Ohr Somayach
        Tanenbaum Educational Center
        244 Route 306
        P.O. Box 334
        Monsey, NY  10952
        (914) 425-1370
        (914) 425-8865 (FAX)
		(800)-Ohr-Somayach
		(888) 647-5666
		(212) 213-3100
		estern.ohr@worldnet.att.net  (e-mail)
		http://www.orhrnet.org

    I don't have much information about this school.  Their promo
    says relaxed, non-judgmental format...  and they also have a winter
    10 day program from about dec 22- jan 2  in addition to their regular
    classroom sessions.  Send them a postcard and check it out!


Shalom Torah Centers
        Shalom Torah Centers
        P.O. Box 1545
        Lakewood, NJ.  08701
        (908) 363-5700
        (908) 363-5789 (FAX)

    Lots of interesting programs; and 5 different New Jersey locations.
    Evening classes, crash courses in Torah, Hebrew, customs, history, etc.


Yeshivath Beth Moshe
        Yeshivath Beth Moshe
        P.O.B. 1141
        930 Hickory St.
        Scranton, PA  18505
        (717) 346-1747

    Get on their mailing list.  If you send them contributions they will send
    you free books that are totally excellent.  In particular their
    translations of Guide to the Perplexed and Rambam's intro to the Mishnah
    are an absolute must.


%%%EndText



